Provided by The Internet Classics Archive.
See bottom for copyright. Available online at
    http://classics.mit.edu//Homer/iliad.html

The Iliad
By Homer


Translated by Samuel Butler

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK I

Sing, O goddess, the anger of Achilles son of Peleus, that brought
countless ills upon the Achaeans. Many a brave soul did it send hurrying
down to Hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and vultures,
for so were the counsels of Jove fulfilled from the day on which the
son of Atreus, king of men, and great Achilles, first fell out with
one another. 

And which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? It was the
son of Jove and Leto; for he was angry with the king and sent a pestilence
upon the host to plague the people, because the son of Atreus had
dishonoured Chryses his priest. Now Chryses had come to the ships
of the Achaeans to free his daughter, and had brought with him a great
ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of Apollo wreathed
with a suppliant's wreath and he besought the Achaeans, but most of
all the two sons of Atreus, who were their chiefs. 

"Sons of Atreus," he cried, "and all other Achaeans, may the gods
who dwell in Olympus grant you to sack the city of Priam, and to reach
your homes in safety; but free my daughter, and accept a ransom for
her, in reverence to Apollo, son of Jove." 

On this the rest of the Achaeans with one voice were for respecting
the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so Agamemnon,
who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. "Old man," said
he, "let me not find you tarrying about our ships, nor yet coming
hereafter. Your sceptre of the god and your wreath shall profit you
nothing. I will not free her. She shall grow old in my house at Argos
far from her own home, busying herself with her loom and visiting
my couch; so go, and do not provoke me or it shall be the worse for
you." 

The old man feared him and obeyed. Not a word he spoke, but went by
the shore of the sounding sea and prayed apart to King Apollo whom
lovely Leto had borne. "Hear me," he cried, "O god of the silver bow,
that protectest Chryse and holy Cilla and rulest Tenedos with thy
might, hear me oh thou of Sminthe. If I have ever decked your temple
with garlands, or burned your thigh-bones in fat of bulls or goats,
grant my prayer, and let your arrows avenge these my tears upon the
Danaans." 

Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He came down furious
from the summits of Olympus, with his bow and his quiver upon his
shoulder, and the arrows rattled on his back with the rage that trembled
within him. He sat himself down away from the ships with a face as
dark as night, and his silver bow rang death as he shot his arrow
in the midst of them. First he smote their mules and their hounds,
but presently he aimed his shafts at the people themselves, and all
day long the pyres of the dead were burning. 

For nine whole days he shot his arrows among the people, but upon
the tenth day Achilles called them in assembly- moved thereto by Juno,
who saw the Achaeans in their death-throes and had compassion upon
them. Then, when they were got together, he rose and spoke among them.

"Son of Atreus," said he, "I deem that we should now turn roving home
if we would escape destruction, for we are being cut down by war and
pestilence at once. Let us ask some priest or prophet, or some reader
of dreams (for dreams, too, are of Jove) who can tell us why Phoebus
Apollo is so angry, and say whether it is for some vow that we have
broken, or hecatomb that we have not offered, and whether he will
accept the savour of lambs and goats without blemish, so as to take
away the plague from us." 

With these words he sat down, and Calchas son of Thestor, wisest of
augurs, who knew things past present and to come, rose to speak. He
it was who had guided the Achaeans with their fleet to Ilius, through
the prophesyings with which Phoebus Apollo had inspired him. With
all sincerity and goodwill he addressed them thus:- 

"Achilles, loved of heaven, you bid me tell you about the anger of
King Apollo, I will therefore do so; but consider first and swear
that you will stand by me heartily in word and deed, for I know that
I shall offend one who rules the Argives with might, to whom all the
Achaeans are in subjection. A plain man cannot stand against the anger
of a king, who if he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge
till he has wreaked it. Consider, therefore, whether or no you will
protect me." 

And Achilles answered, "Fear not, but speak as it is borne in upon
you from heaven, for by Apollo, Calchas, to whom you pray, and whose
oracles you reveal to us, not a Danaan at our ships shall lay his
hand upon you, while I yet live to look upon the face of the earth-
no, not though you name Agamemnon himself, who is by far the foremost
of the Achaeans." 

Thereon the seer spoke boldly. "The god," he said, "is angry neither
about vow nor hecatomb, but for his priest's sake, whom Agamemnon
has dishonoured, in that he would not free his daughter nor take a
ransom for her; therefore has he sent these evils upon us, and will
yet send others. He will not deliver the Danaans from this pestilence
till Agamemnon has restored the girl without fee or ransom to her
father, and has sent a holy hecatomb to Chryse. Thus we may perhaps
appease him." 

With these words he sat down, and Agamemnon rose in anger. His heart
was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he scowled on Calchas
and said, "Seer of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth things concerning
me, but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. You have
brought me neither comfort nor performance; and now you come seeing
among Danaans, and saying that Apollo has plagued us because I would
not take a ransom for this girl, the daughter of Chryses. I have set
my heart on keeping her in my own house, for I love her better even
than my own wife Clytemnestra, whose peer she is alike in form and
feature, in understanding and accomplishments. Still I will give her
up if I must, for I would have the people live, not die; but you must
find me a prize instead, or I alone among the Argives shall be without
one. This is not well; for you behold, all of you, that my prize is
to go elsewhither." 

And Achilles answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, covetous beyond
all mankind, how shall the Achaeans find you another prize? We have
no common store from which to take one. Those we took from the cities
have been awarded; we cannot disallow the awards that have been made
already. Give this girl, therefore, to the god, and if ever Jove grants
us to sack the city of Troy we will requite you three and fourfold."

Then Agamemnon said, "Achilles, valiant though you be, you shall not
thus outwit me. You shall not overreach and you shall not persuade
me. Are you to keep your own prize, while I sit tamely under my loss
and give up the girl at your bidding? Let the Achaeans find me a prize
in fair exchange to my liking, or I will come and take your own, or
that of Ajax or of Ulysses; and he to whomsoever I may come shall
rue my coming. But of this we will take thought hereafter; for the
present, let us draw a ship into the sea, and find a crew for her
expressly; let us put a hecatomb on board, and let us send Chryseis
also; further, let some chief man among us be in command, either Ajax,
or Idomeneus, or yourself, son of Peleus, mighty warrior that you
are, that we may offer sacrifice and appease the the anger of the
god." 

Achilles scowled at him and answered, "You are steeped in insolence
and lust of gain. With what heart can any of the Achaeans do your
bidding, either on foray or in open fighting? I came not warring here
for any ill the Trojans had done me. I have no quarrel with them.
They have not raided my cattle nor my horses, nor cut down my harvests
on the rich plains of Phthia; for between me and them there is a great
space, both mountain and sounding sea. We have followed you, Sir Insolence!
for your pleasure, not ours- to gain satisfaction from the Trojans
for your shameless self and for Menelaus. You forget this, and threaten
to rob me of the prize for which I have toiled, and which the sons
of the Achaeans have given me. Never when the Achaeans sack any rich
city of the Trojans do I receive so good a prize as you do, though
it is my hands that do the better part of the fighting. When the sharing
comes, your share is far the largest, and I, forsooth, must go back
to my ships, take what I can get and be thankful, when my labour of
fighting is done. Now, therefore, I shall go back to Phthia; it will
be much better for me to return home with my ships, for I will not
stay here dishonoured to gather gold and substance for you."

And Agamemnon answered, "Fly if you will, I shall make you no prayers
to stay you. I have others here who will do me honour, and above all
Jove, the lord of counsel. There is no king here so hateful to me
as you are, for you are ever quarrelsome and ill affected. What though
you be brave? Was it not heaven that made you so? Go home, then, with
your ships and comrades to lord it over the Myrmidons. I care neither
for you nor for your anger; and thus will I do: since Phoebus Apollo
is taking Chryseis from me, I shall send her with my ship and my followers,
but I shall come to your tent and take your own prize Briseis, that
you may learn how much stronger I am than you are, and that another
may fear to set himself up as equal or comparable with me."

The son of Peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast
was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and
kill the son of Atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger.
While he was thus in two minds, and was drawing his mighty sword from
its scabbard, Minerva came down from heaven (for Juno had sent her
in the love she bore to them both), and seized the son of Peleus by
his yellow hair, visible to him alone, for of the others no man could
see her. Achilles turned in amaze, and by the fire that flashed from
her eyes at once knew that she was Minerva. "Why are you here," said
he, "daughter of aegis-bearing Jove? To see the pride of Agamemnon,
son of Atreus? Let me tell you- and it shall surely be- he shall pay
for this insolence with his life." 

And Minerva said, "I come from heaven, if you will hear me, to bid
you stay your anger. Juno has sent me, who cares for both of you alike.
Cease, then, this brawling, and do not draw your sword; rail at him
if you will, and your railing will not be vain, for I tell you- and
it shall surely be- that you shall hereafter receive gifts three times
as splendid by reason of this present insult. Hold, therefore, and
obey." 

"Goddess," answered Achilles, "however angry a man may be, he must
do as you two command him. This will be best, for the gods ever hear
the prayers of him who has obeyed them." 

He stayed his hand on the silver hilt of his sword, and thrust it
back into the scabbard as Minerva bade him. Then she went back to
Olympus among the other gods, and to the house of aegis-bearing Jove.

But the son of Peleus again began railing at the son of Atreus, for
he was still in a rage. "Wine-bibber," he cried, "with the face of
a dog and the heart of a hind, you never dare to go out with the host
in fight, nor yet with our chosen men in ambuscade. You shun this
as you do death itself. You had rather go round and rob his prizes
from any man who contradicts you. You devour your people, for you
are king over a feeble folk; otherwise, son of Atreus, henceforward
you would insult no man. Therefore I say, and swear it with a great
oath- nay, by this my sceptre which shalt sprout neither leaf nor
shoot, nor bud anew from the day on which it left its parent stem
upon the mountains- for the axe stripped it of leaf and bark, and
now the sons of the Achaeans bear it as judges and guardians of the
decrees of heaven- so surely and solemnly do I swear that hereafter
they shall look fondly for Achilles and shall not find him. In the
day of your distress, when your men fall dying by the murderous hand
of Hector, you shall not know how to help them, and shall rend your
heart with rage for the hour when you offered insult to the bravest
of the Achaeans." 

With this the son of Peleus dashed his gold-bestudded sceptre on the
ground and took his seat, while the son of Atreus was beginning fiercely
from his place upon the other side. Then uprose smooth-tongued Nestor,
the facile speaker of the Pylians, and the words fell from his lips
sweeter than honey. Two generations of men born and bred in Pylos
had passed away under his rule, and he was now reigning over the third.
With all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:-

"Of a truth," he said, "a great sorrow has befallen the Achaean land.
Surely Priam with his sons would rejoice, and the Trojans be glad
at heart if they could hear this quarrel between you two, who are
so excellent in fight and counsel. I am older than either of you;
therefore be guided by me. Moreover I have been the familiar friend
of men even greater than you are, and they did not disregard my counsels.
Never again can I behold such men as Pirithous and Dryas shepherd
of his people, or as Caeneus, Exadius, godlike Polyphemus, and Theseus
son of Aegeus, peer of the immortals. These were the mightiest men
ever born upon this earth: mightiest were they, and when they fought
the fiercest tribes of mountain savages they utterly overthrew them.
I came from distant Pylos, and went about among them, for they would
have me come, and I fought as it was in me to do. Not a man now living
could withstand them, but they heard my words, and were persuaded
by them. So be it also with yourselves, for this is the more excellent
way. Therefore, Agamemnon, though you be strong, take not this girl
away, for the sons of the Achaeans have already given her to Achilles;
and you, Achilles, strive not further with the king, for no man who
by the grace of Jove wields a sceptre has like honour with Agamemnon.
You are strong, and have a goddess for your mother; but Agamemnon
is stronger than you, for he has more people under him. Son of Atreus,
check your anger, I implore you; end this quarrel with Achilles, who
in the day of battle is a tower of strength to the Achaeans."

And Agamemnon answered, "Sir, all that you have said is true, but
this fellow must needs become our lord and master: he must be lord
of all, king of all, and captain of all, and this shall hardly be.
Granted that the gods have made him a great warrior, have they also
given him the right to speak with railing?" 

Achilles interrupted him. "I should be a mean coward," he cried, "were
I to give in to you in all things. Order other people about, not me,
for I shall obey no longer. Furthermore I say- and lay my saying to
your heart- I shall fight neither you nor any man about this girl,
for those that take were those also that gave. But of all else that
is at my ship you shall carry away nothing by force. Try, that others
may see; if you do, my spear shall be reddened with your blood."

When they had quarrelled thus angrily, they rose, and broke up the
assembly at the ships of the Achaeans. The son of Peleus went back
to his tents and ships with the son of Menoetius and his company,
while Agamemnon drew a vessel into the water and chose a crew of twenty
oarsmen. He escorted Chryseis on board and sent moreover a hecatomb
for the god. And Ulysses went as captain. 

These, then, went on board and sailed their ways over the sea. But
the son of Atreus bade the people purify themselves; so they purified
themselves and cast their filth into the sea. Then they offered hecatombs
of bulls and goats without blemish on the sea-shore, and the smoke
with the savour of their sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven.

Thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. But Agamemnon did
not forget the threat that he had made Achilles, and called his trusty
messengers and squires Talthybius and Eurybates. "Go," said he, "to
the tent of Achilles, son of Peleus; take Briseis by the hand and
bring her hither; if he will not give her I shall come with others
and take her- which will press him harder." 

He charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they
went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents
and ships of the Myrmidons. They found Achilles sitting by his tent
and his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. They stood
fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak,
but he knew them and said, "Welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and
men; draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with Agamemnon who
has sent you for the girl Briseis. Therefore, Patroclus, bring her
and give her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods,
by mortal men, and by the fierceness of Agamemnon's anger, that if
ever again there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they
shall seek and they shall not find. Agamemnon is mad with rage and
knows not how to look before and after that the Achaeans may fight
by their ships in safety." 

Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. He brought Briseis
from the tent and gave her over to the heralds, who took her with
them to the ships of the Achaeans- and the woman was loth to go. Then
Achilles went all alone by the side of the hoar sea, weeping and looking
out upon the boundless waste of waters. He raised his hands in prayer
to his immortal mother, "Mother," he cried, "you bore me doomed to
live but for a little season; surely Jove, who thunders from Olympus,
might have made that little glorious. It is not so. Agamemnon, son
of Atreus, has done me dishonour, and has robbed me of my prize by
force." 

As he spoke he wept aloud, and his mother heard him where she was
sitting in the depths of the sea hard by the old man her father. Forthwith
she rose as it were a grey mist out of the waves, sat down before
him as he stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said, "My
son, why are you weeping? What is it that grieves you? Keep it not
from me, but tell me, that we may know it together." 

Achilles drew a deep sigh and said, "You know it; why tell you what
you know well already? We went to Thebe the strong city of Eetion,
sacked it, and brought hither the spoil. The sons of the Achaeans
shared it duly among themselves, and chose lovely Chryseis as the
meed of Agamemnon; but Chryses, priest of Apollo, came to the ships
of the Achaeans to free his daughter, and brought with him a great
ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of Apollo, wreathed
with a suppliant's wreath, and he besought the Achaeans, but most
of all the two sons of Atreus who were their chiefs. 

"On this the rest of the Achaeans with one voice were for respecting
the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so Agamemnon,
who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. So he went back
in anger, and Apollo, who loved him dearly, heard his prayer. Then
the god sent a deadly dart upon the Argives, and the people died thick
on one another, for the arrows went everywhither among the wide host
of the Achaeans. At last a seer in the fulness of his knowledge declared
to us the oracles of Apollo, and I was myself first to say that we
should appease him. Whereon the son of Atreus rose in anger, and threatened
that which he has since done. The Achaeans are now taking the girl
in a ship to Chryse, and sending gifts of sacrifice to the god; but
the heralds have just taken from my tent the daughter of Briseus,
whom the Achaeans had awarded to myself. 

"Help your brave son, therefore, if you are able. Go to Olympus, and
if you have ever done him service in word or deed, implore the aid
of Jove. Ofttimes in my father's house have I heard you glory in that
you alone of the immortals saved the son of Saturn from ruin, when
the others, with Juno, Neptune, and Pallas Minerva would have put
him in bonds. It was you, goddess, who delivered him by calling to
Olympus the hundred-handed monster whom gods call Briareus, but men
Aegaeon, for he is stronger even than his father; when therefore he
took his seat all-glorious beside the son of Saturn, the other gods
were afraid, and did not bind him. Go, then, to him, remind him of
all this, clasp his knees, and bid him give succour to the Trojans.
Let the Achaeans be hemmed in at the sterns of their ships, and perish
on the sea-shore, that they may reap what joy they may of their king,
and that Agamemnon may rue his blindness in offering insult to the
foremost of the Achaeans." 

Thetis wept and answered, "My son, woe is me that I should have borne
or suckled you. Would indeed that you had lived your span free from
all sorrow at your ships, for it is all too brief; alas, that you
should be at once short of life and long of sorrow above your peers:
woe, therefore, was the hour in which I bore you; nevertheless I will
go to the snowy heights of Olympus, and tell this tale to Jove, if
he will hear our prayer: meanwhile stay where you are with your ships,
nurse your anger against the Achaeans, and hold aloof from fight.
For Jove went yesterday to Oceanus, to a feast among the Ethiopians,
and the other gods went with him. He will return to Olympus twelve
days hence; I will then go to his mansion paved with bronze and will
beseech him; nor do I doubt that I shall be able to persuade him."

On this she left him, still furious at the loss of her that had been
taken from him. Meanwhile Ulysses reached Chryse with the hecatomb.
When they had come inside the harbour they furled the sails and laid
them in the ship's hold; they slackened the forestays, lowered the
mast into its place, and rowed the ship to the place where they would
have her lie; there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast
the hawsers. They then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb
for Apollo; Chryseis also left the ship, and Ulysses led her to the
altar to deliver her into the hands of her father. "Chryses," said
he, "King Agamemnon has sent me to bring you back your child, and
to offer sacrifice to Apollo on behalf of the Danaans, that we may
propitiate the god, who has now brought sorrow upon the Argives."

So saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly,
and they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the
god. They washed their hands and took up the barley-meal to sprinkle
over the victims, while Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud
on their behalf. "Hear me," he cried, "O god of the silver bow, that
protectest Chryse and holy Cilla, and rulest Tenedos with thy might.
Even as thou didst hear me aforetime when I prayed, and didst press
hardly upon the Achaeans, so hear me yet again, and stay this fearful
pestilence from the Danaans." 

Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. When they had done
praying and sprinkling the barley-meal, they drew back the heads of
the victims and killed and flayed them. They cut out the thigh-bones,
wrapped them round in two layers of fat, set some pieces of raw meat
on the top of them, and then Chryses laid them on the wood fire and
poured wine over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged
spits in their hands. When the thigh-bones were burned and they had
tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small, put the pieces
upon the spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off:
then, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, they
ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, pages filled the
mixing-bowl with wine and water and handed it round, after giving
every man his drink-offering. 

Thus all day long the young men worshipped the god with song, hymning
him and chaunting the joyous paean, and the god took pleasure in their
voices; but when the sun went down, and it came on dark, they laid
themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship, and when
the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they again set
sail for the host of the Achaeans. Apollo sent them a fair wind, so
they raised their mast and hoisted their white sails aloft. As the
sail bellied with the wind the ship flew through the deep blue water,
and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. When they
reached the wide-stretching host of the Achaeans, they drew the vessel
ashore, high and dry upon the sands, set her strong props beneath
her, and went their ways to their own tents and ships. 

But Achilles abode at his ships and nursed his anger. He went not
to the honourable assembly, and sallied not forth to fight, but gnawed
at his own heart, pining for battle and the war-cry. 

Now after twelve days the immortal gods came back in a body to Olympus,
and Jove led the way. Thetis was not unmindful of the charge her son
had laid upon her, so she rose from under the sea and went through
great heaven with early morning to Olympus, where she found the mighty
son of Saturn sitting all alone upon its topmost ridges. She sat herself
down before him, and with her left hand seized his knees, while with
her right she caught him under the chin, and besought him, saying-

"Father Jove, if I ever did you service in word or deed among the
immortals, hear my prayer, and do honour to my son, whose life is
to be cut short so early. King Agamemnon has dishonoured him by taking
his prize and keeping her. Honour him then yourself, Olympian lord
of counsel, and grant victory to the Trojans, till the Achaeans give
my son his due and load him with riches in requital." 

Jove sat for a while silent, and without a word, but Thetis still
kept firm hold of his knees, and besought him a second time. "Incline
your head," said she, "and promise me surely, or else deny me- for
you have nothing to fear- that I may learn how greatly you disdain
me." 

At this Jove was much troubled and answered, "I shall have trouble
if you set me quarrelling with Juno, for she will provoke me with
her taunting speeches; even now she is always railing at me before
the other gods and accusing me of giving aid to the Trojans. Go back
now, lest she should find out. I will consider the matter, and will
bring it about as wish. See, I incline my head that you believe me.
This is the most solemn that I can give to any god. I never recall
my word, or deceive, or fail to do what I say, when I have nodded
my head." 

As he spoke the son of Saturn bowed his dark brows, and the ambrosial
locks swayed on his immortal head, till vast Olympus reeled.

When the pair had thus laid their plans, they parted- Jove to his
house, while the goddess quitted the splendour of Olympus, and plunged
into the depths of the sea. The gods rose from their seats, before
the coming of their sire. Not one of them dared to remain sitting,
but all stood up as he came among them. There, then, he took his seat.
But Juno, when she saw him, knew that he and the old merman's daughter,
silver-footed Thetis, had been hatching mischief, so she at once began
to upbraid him. "Trickster," she cried, "which of the gods have you
been taking into your counsels now? You are always settling matters
in secret behind my back, and have never yet told me, if you could
help it, one word of your intentions." 

"Juno," replied the sire of gods and men, "you must not expect to
be informed of all my counsels. You are my wife, but you would find
it hard to understand them. When it is proper for you to hear, there
is no one, god or man, who will be told sooner, but when I mean to
keep a matter to myself, you must not pry nor ask questions."

"Dread son of Saturn," answered Juno, "what are you talking about?
I? Pry and ask questions? Never. I let you have your own way in everything.
Still, I have a strong misgiving that the old merman's daughter Thetis
has been talking you over, for she was with you and had hold of your
knees this self-same morning. I believe, therefore, that you have
been promising her to give glory to Achilles, and to kill much people
at the ships of the Achaeans." 

"Wife," said Jove, "I can do nothing but you suspect me and find it
out. You will take nothing by it, for I shall only dislike you the
more, and it will go harder with you. Granted that it is as you say;
I mean to have it so; sit down and hold your tongue as I bid you for
if I once begin to lay my hands about you, though all heaven were
on your side it would profit you nothing." 

On this Juno was frightened, so she curbed her stubborn will and sat
down in silence. But the heavenly beings were disquieted throughout
the house of Jove, till the cunning workman Vulcan began to try and
pacify his mother Juno. "It will be intolerable," said he, "if you
two fall to wrangling and setting heaven in an uproar about a pack
of mortals. If such ill counsels are to prevail, we shall have no
pleasure at our banquet. Let me then advise my mother- and she must
herself know that it will be better- to make friends with my dear
father Jove, lest he again scold her and disturb our feast. If the
Olympian Thunderer wants to hurl us all from our seats, he can do
so, for he is far the strongest, so give him fair words, and he will
then soon be in a good humour with us." 

As he spoke, he took a double cup of nectar, and placed it in his
mother's hand. "Cheer up, my dear mother," said he, "and make the
best of it. I love you dearly, and should be very sorry to see you
get a thrashing; however grieved I might be, I could not help for
there is no standing against Jove. Once before when I was trying to
help you, he caught me by the foot and flung me from the heavenly
threshold. All day long from morn till eve, was I falling, till at
sunset I came to ground in the island of Lemnos, and there I lay,
with very little life left in me, till the Sintians came and tended
me." 

Juno smiled at this, and as she smiled she took the cup from her son's
hands. Then Vulcan drew sweet nectar from the mixing-bowl, and served
it round among the gods, going from left to right; and the blessed
gods laughed out a loud applause as they saw him ing bustling about
the heavenly mansion. 

Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted,
and every one had his full share, so that all were satisfied. Apollo
struck his lyre, and the Muses lifted up their sweet voices, calling
and answering one another. But when the sun's glorious light had faded,
they went home to bed, each in his own abode, which lame Vulcan with
his consummate skill had fashioned for them. So Jove, the Olympian
Lord of Thunder, hied him to the bed in which he always slept; and
when he had got on to it he went to sleep, with Juno of the golden
throne by his side. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK II

Now the other gods and the armed warriors on the plain slept soundly,
but Jove was wakeful, for he was thinking how to do honour to Achilles,
and destroyed much people at the ships of the Achaeans. In the end
he deemed it would be best to send a lying dream to King Agamemnon;
so he called one to him and said to it, "Lying Dream, go to the ships
of the Achaeans, into the tent of Agamemnon, and say to him word to
word as I now bid you. Tell him to get the Achaeans instantly under
arms, for he shall take Troy. There are no longer divided counsels
among the gods; Juno has brought them to her own mind, and woe betides
the Trojans." 

The dream went when it had heard its message, and soon reached the
ships of the Achaeans. It sought Agamemnon son of Atreus and found
him in his tent, wrapped in a profound slumber. It hovered over his
head in the likeness of Nestor, son of Neleus, whom Agamemnon honoured
above all his councillors, and said:- 

"You are sleeping, son of Atreus; one who has the welfare of his host
and so much other care upon his shoulders should dock his sleep. Hear
me at once, for I come as a messenger from Jove, who, though he be
not near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. He bids you get
the Achaeans instantly under arms, for you shall take Troy. There
are no longer divided counsels among the gods; Juno has brought them
over to her own mind, and woe betides the Trojans at the hands of
Jove. Remember this, and when you wake see that it does not escape
you." 

The dream then left him, and he thought of things that were, surely
not to be accomplished. He thought that on that same day he was to
take the city of Priam, but he little knew what was in the mind of
Jove, who had many another hard-fought fight in store alike for Danaans
and Trojans. Then presently he woke, with the divine message still
ringing in his ears; so he sat upright, and put on his soft shirt
so fair and new, and over this his heavy cloak. He bound his sandals
on to his comely feet, and slung his silver-studded sword about his
shoulders; then he took the imperishable staff of his father, and
sallied forth to the ships of the Achaeans. 

The goddess Dawn now wended her way to vast Olympus that she might
herald day to Jove and to the other immortals, and Agamemnon sent
the criers round to call the people in assembly; so they called them
and the people gathered thereon. But first he summoned a meeting of
the elders at the ship of Nestor king of Pylos, and when they were
assembled he laid a cunning counsel before them. 

"My friends," said he, "I have had a dream from heaven in the dead
of night, and its face and figure resembled none but Nestor's. It
hovered over my head and said, 'You are sleeping, son of Atreus; one
who has the welfare of his host and so much other care upon his shoulders
should dock his sleep. Hear me at once, for I am a messenger from
Jove, who, though he be not near, yet takes thought for you and pities
you. He bids you get the Achaeans instantly under arms, for you shall
take Troy. There are no longer divided counsels among the gods; Juno
has brought them over to her own mind, and woe betides the Trojans
at the hands of Jove. Remember this.' The dream then vanished and
I awoke. Let us now, therefore, arm the sons of the Achaeans. But
it will be well that I should first sound them, and to this end I
will tell them to fly with their ships; but do you others go about
among the host and prevent their doing so." 

He then sat down, and Nestor the prince of Pylos with all sincerity
and goodwill addressed them thus: "My friends," said he, "princes
and councillors of the Argives, if any other man of the Achaeans had
told us of this dream we should have declared it false, and would
have had nothing to do with it. But he who has seen it is the foremost
man among us; we must therefore set about getting the people under
arms." 

With this he led the way from the assembly, and the other sceptred
kings rose with him in obedience to the word of Agamemnon; but the
people pressed forward to hear. They swarmed like bees that sally
from some hollow cave and flit in countless throng among the spring
flowers, bunched in knots and clusters; even so did the mighty multitude
pour from ships and tents to the assembly, and range themselves upon
the wide-watered shore, while among them ran Wildfire Rumour, messenger
of Jove, urging them ever to the fore. Thus they gathered in a pell-mell
of mad confusion, and the earth groaned under the tramp of men as
the people sought their places. Nine heralds went crying about among
them to stay their tumult and bid them listen to the kings, till at
last they were got into their several places and ceased their clamour.
Then King Agamemnon rose, holding his sceptre. This was the work of
Vulcan, who gave it to Jove the son of Saturn. Jove gave it to Mercury,
slayer of Argus, guide and guardian. King Mercury gave it to Pelops,
the mighty charioteer, and Pelops to Atreus, shepherd of his people.
Atreus, when he died, left it to Thyestes, rich in flocks, and Thyestes
in his turn left it to be borne by Agamemnon, that he might be lord
of all Argos and of the isles. Leaning, then, on his sceptre, he addressed
the Argives. 

"My friends," he said, "heroes, servants of Mars, the hand of heaven
has been laid heavily upon me. Cruel Jove gave me his solemn promise
that I should sack the city of Priam before returning, but he has
played me false, and is now bidding me go ingloriously back to Argos
with the loss of much people. Such is the will of Jove, who has laid
many a proud city in the dust, as he will yet lay others, for his
power is above all. It will be a sorry tale hereafter that an Achaean
host, at once so great and valiant, battled in vain against men fewer
in number than themselves; but as yet the end is not in sight. Think
that the Achaeans and Trojans have sworn to a solemn covenant, and
that they have each been numbered- the Trojans by the roll of their
householders, and we by companies of ten; think further that each
of our companies desired to have a Trojan householder to pour out
their wine; we are so greatly more in number that full many a company
would have to go without its cup-bearer. But they have in the town
allies from other places, and it is these that hinder me from being
able to sack the rich city of Ilius. Nine of Jove years are gone;
the timbers of our ships have rotted; their tackling is sound no longer.
Our wives and little ones at home look anxiously for our coming, but
the work that we came hither to do has not been done. Now, therefore,
let us all do as I say: let us sail back to our own land, for we shall
not take Troy." 

With these words he moved the hearts of the multitude, so many of
them as knew not the cunning counsel of Agamemnon. They surged to
and fro like the waves of the Icarian Sea, when the east and south
winds break from heaven's clouds to lash them; or as when the west
wind sweeps over a field of corn and the ears bow beneath the blast,
even so were they swayed as they flew with loud cries towards the
ships, and the dust from under their feet rose heavenward. They cheered
each other on to draw the ships into the sea; they cleared the channels
in front of them; they began taking away the stays from underneath
them, and the welkin rang with their glad cries, so eager were they
to return. 

Then surely the Argives would have returned after a fashion that was
not fated. But Juno said to Minerva, "Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing
Jove, unweariable, shall the Argives fly home to their own land over
the broad sea, and leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of still
keeping Helen, for whose sake so many of the Achaeans have died at
Troy, far from their homes? Go about at once among the host, and speak
fairly to them, man by man, that they draw not their ships into the
sea." 

Minerva was not slack to do her bidding. Down she darted from the
topmost summits of Olympus, and in a moment she was at the ships of
the Achaeans. There she found Ulysses, peer of Jove in counsel, standing
alone. He had not as yet laid a hand upon his ship, for he was grieved
and sorry; so she went close up to him and said, "Ulysses, noble son
of Laertes, are you going to fling yourselves into your ships and
be off home to your own land in this way? Will you leave Priam and
the Trojans the glory of still keeping Helen, for whose sake so many
of the Achaeans have died at Troy, far from their homes? Go about
at once among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by man, that
they draw not their ships into the sea." 

Ulysses knew the voice as that of the goddess: he flung his cloak
from him and set off to run. His servant Eurybates, a man of Ithaca,
who waited on him, took charge of the cloak, whereon Ulysses went
straight up to Agamemnon and received from him his ancestral, imperishable
staff. With this he went about among the ships of the Achaeans.

Whenever he met a king or chieftain, he stood by him and spoke him
fairly. "Sir," said he, "this flight is cowardly and unworthy. Stand
to your post, and bid your people also keep their places. You do not
yet know the full mind of Agamemnon; he was sounding us, and ere long
will visit the Achaeans with his displeasure. We were not all of us
at the council to hear what he then said; see to it lest he be angry
and do us a mischief; for the pride of kings is great, and the hand
of Jove is with them." 

But when he came across any common man who was making a noise, he
struck him with his staff and rebuked him, saying, "Sirrah, hold your
peace, and listen to better men than yourself. You are a coward and
no soldier; you are nobody either in fight or council; we cannot all
be kings; it is not well that there should be many masters; one man
must be supreme- one king to whom the son of scheming Saturn has given
the sceptre of sovereignty over you all." 

Thus masterfully did he go about among the host, and the people hurried
back to the council from their tents and ships with a sound as the
thunder of surf when it comes crashing down upon the shore, and all
the sea is in an uproar. 

The rest now took their seats and kept to their own several places,
but Thersites still went on wagging his unbridled tongue- a man of
many words, and those unseemly; a monger of sedition, a railer against
all who were in authority, who cared not what he said, so that he
might set the Achaeans in a laugh. He was the ugliest man of all those
that came before Troy- bandy-legged, lame of one foot, with his two
shoulders rounded and hunched over his chest. His head ran up to a
point, but there was little hair on the top of it. Achilles and Ulysses
hated him worst of all, for it was with them that he was most wont
to wrangle; now, however, with a shrill squeaky voice he began heaping
his abuse on Agamemnon. The Achaeans were angry and disgusted, yet
none the less he kept on brawling and bawling at the son of Atreus.

"Agamemnon," he cried, "what ails you now, and what more do you want?
Your tents are filled with bronze and with fair women, for whenever
we take a town we give you the pick of them. Would you have yet more
gold, which some Trojan is to give you as a ransom for his son, when
I or another Achaean has taken him prisoner? or is it some young girl
to hide and lie with? It is not well that you, the ruler of the Achaeans,
should bring them into such misery. Weakling cowards, women rather
than men, let us sail home, and leave this fellow here at Troy to
stew in his own meeds of honour, and discover whether we were of any
service to him or no. Achilles is a much better man than he is, and
see how he has treated him- robbing him of his prize and keeping it
himself. Achilles takes it meekly and shows no fight; if he did, son
of Atreus, you would never again insult him." 

Thus railed Thersites, but Ulysses at once went up to him and rebuked
him sternly. "Check your glib tongue, Thersites," said be, "and babble
not a word further. Chide not with princes when you have none to back
you. There is no viler creature come before Troy with the sons of
Atreus. Drop this chatter about kings, and neither revile them nor
keep harping about going home. We do not yet know how things are going
to be, nor whether the Achaeans are to return with good success or
evil. How dare you gibe at Agamemnon because the Danaans have awarded
him so many prizes? I tell you, therefore- and it shall surely be-
that if I again catch you talking such nonsense, I will either forfeit
my own head and be no more called father of Telemachus, or I will
take you, strip you stark naked, and whip you out of the assembly
till you go blubbering back to the ships." 

On this he beat him with his staff about the back and shoulders till
he dropped and fell a-weeping. The golden sceptre raised a bloody
weal on his back, so he sat down frightened and in pain, looking foolish
as he wiped the tears from his eyes. The people were sorry for him,
yet they laughed heartily, and one would turn to his neighbour saying,
"Ulysses has done many a good thing ere now in fight and council,
but he never did the Argives a better turn than when he stopped this
fellow's mouth from prating further. He will give the kings no more
of his insolence." 

Thus said the people. Then Ulysses rose, sceptre in hand, and Minerva
in the likeness of a herald bade the people be still, that those who
were far off might hear him and consider his council. He therefore
with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus:- 

"King Agamemnon, the Achaeans are for making you a by-word among all
mankind. They forget the promise they made you when they set out from
Argos, that you should not return till you had sacked the town of
Troy, and, like children or widowed women, they murmur and would set
off homeward. True it is that they have had toil enough to be disheartened.
A man chafes at having to stay away from his wife even for a single
month, when he is on shipboard, at the mercy of wind and sea, but
it is now nine long years that we have been kept here; I cannot, therefore,
blame the Achaeans if they turn restive; still we shall be shamed
if we go home empty after so long a stay- therefore, my friends, be
patient yet a little longer that we may learn whether the prophesyings
of Calchas were false or true. 

"All who have not since perished must remember as though it were yesterday
or the day before, how the ships of the Achaeans were detained in
Aulis when we were on our way hither to make war on Priam and the
Trojans. We were ranged round about a fountain offering hecatombs
to the gods upon their holy altars, and there was a fine plane-tree
from beneath which there welled a stream of pure water. Then we saw
a prodigy; for Jove sent a fearful serpent out of the ground, with
blood-red stains upon its back, and it darted from under the altar
on to the plane-tree. Now there was a brood of young sparrows, quite
small, upon the topmost bough, peeping out from under the leaves,
eight in all, and their mother that hatched them made nine. The serpent
ate the poor cheeping things, while the old bird flew about lamenting
her little ones; but the serpent threw his coils about her and caught
her by the wing as she was screaming. Then, when he had eaten both
the sparrow and her young, the god who had sent him made him become
a sign; for the son of scheming Saturn turned him into stone, and
we stood there wondering at that which had come to pass. Seeing, then,
that such a fearful portent had broken in upon our hecatombs, Calchas
forthwith declared to us the oracles of heaven. 'Why, Achaeans,' said
he, 'are you thus speechless? Jove has sent us this sign, long in
coming, and long ere it be fulfilled, though its fame shall last for
ever. As the serpent ate the eight fledglings and the sparrow that
hatched them, which makes nine, so shall we fight nine years at Troy,
but in the tenth shall take the town.' This was what he said, and
now it is all coming true. Stay here, therefore, all of you, till
we take the city of Priam." 

On this the Argives raised a shout, till the ships rang again with
the uproar. Nestor, knight of Gerene, then addressed them. "Shame
on you," he cried, "to stay talking here like children, when you should
fight like men. Where are our covenants now, and where the oaths that
we have taken? Shall our counsels be flung into the fire, with our
drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship wherein we have
put our trust? We waste our time in words, and for all our talking
here shall be no further forward. Stand, therefore, son of Atreus,
by your own steadfast purpose; lead the Argives on to battle, and
leave this handful of men to rot, who scheme, and scheme in vain,
to get back to Argos ere they have learned whether Jove be true or
a liar. For the mighty son of Saturn surely promised that we should
succeed, when we Argives set sail to bring death and destruction upon
the Trojans. He showed us favourable signs by flashing his lightning
on our right hands; therefore let none make haste to go till he has
first lain with the wife of some Trojan, and avenged the toil and
sorrow that he has suffered for the sake of Helen. Nevertheless, if
any man is in such haste to be at home again, let him lay his hand
to his ship that he may meet his doom in the sight of all. But, O
king, consider and give ear to my counsel, for the word that I say
may not be neglected lightly. Divide your men, Agamemnon, into their
several tribes and clans, that clans and tribes may stand by and help
one another. If you do this, and if the Achaeans obey you, you will
find out who, both chiefs and peoples, are brave, and who are cowards;
for they will vie against the other. Thus you shall also learn whether
it is through the counsel of heaven or the cowardice of man that you
shall fail to take the town." 

And Agamemnon answered, "Nestor, you have again outdone the sons of
the Achaeans in counsel. Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo,
that I had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of King
Priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it.
But the son of Saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife.
Achilles and I are quarrelling about this girl, in which matter I
was the first to offend; if we can be of one mind again, the Trojans
will not stave off destruction for a day. Now, therefore, get your
morning meal, that our hosts join in fight. Whet well your spears;
see well to the ordering of your shields; give good feeds to your
horses, and look your chariots carefully over, that we may do battle
the livelong day; for we shall have no rest, not for a moment, till
night falls to part us. The bands that bear your shields shall be
wet with the sweat upon your shoulders, your hands shall weary upon
your spears, your horses shall steam in front of your chariots, and
if I see any man shirking the fight, or trying to keep out of it at
the ships, there shall be no help for him, but he shall be a prey
to dogs and vultures." 

Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans roared applause. As when the waves
run high before the blast of the south wind and break on some lofty
headland, dashing against it and buffeting it without ceasing, as
the storms from every quarter drive them, even so did the Achaeans
rise and hurry in all directions to their ships. There they lighted
their fires at their tents and got dinner, offering sacrifice every
man to one or other of the gods, and praying each one of them that
he might live to come out of the fight. Agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed
a fat five-year-old bull to the mighty son of Saturn, and invited
the princes and elders of his host. First he asked Nestor and King
Idomeneus, then the two Ajaxes and the son of Tydeus, and sixthly
Ulysses, peer of gods in counsel; but Menelaus came of his own accord,
for he knew how busy his brother then was. They stood round the bull
with the barley-meal in their hands, and Agamemnon prayed, saying,
"Jove, most glorious, supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest
upon the storm-cloud, grant that the sun may not go down, nor the
night fall, till the palace of Priam is laid low, and its gates are
consumed with fire. Grant that my sword may pierce the shirt of Hector
about his heart, and that full many of his comrades may bite the dust
as they fall dying round him." 

Thus he prayed, but the son of Saturn would not fulfil his prayer.
He accepted the sacrifice, yet none the less increased their toil
continually. When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal
upon the victim, they drew back its head, killed it, and then flayed
it. They cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped them round in two layers
of fat, and set pieces of raw meat on the top of them. These they
burned upon the split logs of firewood, but they spitted the inward
meats, and held them in the flames to cook. When the thigh-bones were
burned, and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up
small, put the pieces upon spits, roasted them till they were done,
and drew them off; then, when they had finished their work and the
feast was ready, they ate it, and every man had his full share, so
that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to eat and
drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak. "King Agamemnon,"
said he, "let us not stay talking here, nor be slack in the work that
heaven has put into our hands. Let the heralds summon the people to
gather at their several ships; we will then go about among the host,
that we may begin fighting at once." 

Thus did he speak, and Agamemnon heeded his words. He at once sent
the criers round to call the people in assembly. So they called them,
and the people gathered thereon. The chiefs about the son of Atreus
chose their men and marshalled them, while Minerva went among them
holding her priceless aegis that knows neither age nor death. From
it there waved a hundred tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven, and
each one of them worth a hundred oxen. With this she darted furiously
everywhere among the hosts of the Achaeans, urging them forward, and
putting courage into the heart of each, so that he might fight and
do battle without ceasing. Thus war became sweeter in their eyes even
than returning home in their ships. As when some great forest fire
is raging upon a mountain top and its light is seen afar, even so
as they marched the gleam of their armour flashed up into the firmament
of heaven. 

They were like great flocks of geese, or cranes, or swans on the plain
about the waters of Cayster, that wing their way hither and thither,
glorying in the pride of flight, and crying as they settle till the
fen is alive with their screaming. Even thus did their tribes pour
from ships and tents on to the plain of the Scamander, and the ground
rang as brass under the feet of men and horses. They stood as thick
upon the flower-bespangled field as leaves that bloom in summer.

As countless swarms of flies buzz around a herdsman's homestead in
the time of spring when the pails are drenched with milk, even so
did the Achaeans swarm on to the plain to charge the Trojans and destroy
them. 

The chiefs disposed their men this way and that before the fight began,
drafting them out as easily as goatherds draft their flocks when they
have got mixed while feeding; and among them went King Agamemnon,
with a head and face like Jove the lord of thunder, a waist like Mars,
and a chest like that of Neptune. As some great bull that lords it
over the herds upon the plain, even so did Jove make the son of Atreus
stand peerless among the multitude of heroes. 

And now, O Muses, dwellers in the mansions of Olympus, tell me- for
you are goddesses and are in all places so that you see all things,
while we know nothing but by report- who were the chiefs and princes
of the Danaans? As for the common soldiers, they were so that I could
not name every single one of them though I had ten tongues, and though
my voice failed not and my heart were of bronze within me, unless
you, O Olympian Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, were to recount
them to me. Nevertheless, I will tell the captains of the ships and
all the fleet together. 

Peneleos, Leitus, Arcesilaus, Prothoenor, and Clonius were captains
of the Boeotians. These were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky Aulis,
and who held Schoenus, Scolus, and the highlands of Eteonus, with
Thespeia, Graia, and the fair city of Mycalessus. They also held Harma,
Eilesium, and Erythrae; and they had Eleon, Hyle, and Peteon; Ocalea
and the strong fortress of Medeon; Copae, Eutresis, and Thisbe the
haunt of doves; Coronea, and the pastures of Haliartus; Plataea and
Glisas; the fortress of Thebes the less; holy Onchestus with its famous
grove of Neptune; Arne rich in vineyards; Midea, sacred Nisa, and
Anthedon upon the sea. From these there came fifty ships, and in each
there were a hundred and twenty young men of the Boeotians.

Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of Mars, led the people that dwelt in
Aspledon and Orchomenus the realm of Minyas. Astyoche a noble maiden
bore them in the house of Actor son of Azeus; for she had gone with
Mars secretly into an upper chamber, and he had lain with her. With
these there came thirty ships. 

The Phoceans were led by Schedius and Epistrophus, sons of mighty
Iphitus the son of Naubolus. These were they that held Cyparissus,
rocky Pytho, holy Crisa, Daulis, and Panopeus; they also that dwelt
in Anemorea and Hyampolis, and about the waters of the river Cephissus,
and Lilaea by the springs of the Cephissus; with their chieftains
came forty ships, and they marshalled the forces of the Phoceans,
which were stationed next to the Boeotians, on their left.

Ajax, the fleet son of Oileus, commanded the Locrians. He was not
so great, nor nearly so great, as Ajax the son of Telamon. He was
a little man, and his breastplate was made of linen, but in use of
the spear he excelled all the Hellenes and the Achaeans. These dwelt
in Cynus, Opous, Calliarus, Bessa, Scarphe, fair Augeae, Tarphe, and
Thronium about the river Boagrius. With him there came forty ships
of the Locrians who dwell beyond Euboea. 

The fierce Abantes held Euboea with its cities, Chalcis, Eretria,
Histiaea rich in vines, Cerinthus upon the sea, and the rock-perched
town of Dium; with them were also the men of Carystus and Styra; Elephenor
of the race of Mars was in command of these; he was son of Chalcodon,
and chief over all the Abantes. With him they came, fleet of foot
and wearing their hair long behind, brave warriors, who would ever
strive to tear open the corslets of their foes with their long ashen
spears. Of these there came fifty ships. 

And they that held the strong city of Athens, the people of great
Erechtheus, who was born of the soil itself, but Jove's daughter,
Minerva, fostered him, and established him at Athens in her own rich
sanctuary. There, year by year, the Athenian youths worship him with
sacrifices of bulls and rams. These were commanded by Menestheus,
son of Peteos. No man living could equal him in the marshalling of
chariots and foot soldiers. Nestor could alone rival him, for he was
older. With him there came fifty ships. 

Ajax brought twelve ships from Salamis, and stationed them alongside
those of the Athenians. 

The men of Argos, again, and those who held the walls of Tiryns, with
Hermione, and Asine upon the gulf; Troezene, Eionae, and the vineyard
lands of Epidaurus; the Achaean youths, moreover, who came from Aegina
and Mases; these were led by Diomed of the loud battle-cry, and Sthenelus
son of famed Capaneus. With them in command was Euryalus, son of king
Mecisteus, son of Talaus; but Diomed was chief over them all. With
these there came eighty ships. 

Those who held the strong city of Mycenae, rich Corinth and Cleonae;
Orneae, Araethyrea, and Licyon, where Adrastus reigned of old; Hyperesia,
high Gonoessa, and Pellene; Aegium and all the coast-land round about
Helice; these sent a hundred ships under the command of King Agamemnon,
son of Atreus. His force was far both finest and most numerous, and
in their midst was the king himself, all glorious in his armour of
gleaming bronze- foremost among the heroes, for he was the greatest
king, and had most men under him. 

And those that dwelt in Lacedaemon, lying low among the hills, Pharis,
Sparta, with Messe the haunt of doves; Bryseae, Augeae, Amyclae, and
Helos upon the sea; Laas, moreover, and Oetylus; these were led by
Menelaus of the loud battle-cry, brother to Agamemnon, and of them
there were sixty ships, drawn up apart from the others. Among them
went Menelaus himself, strong in zeal, urging his men to fight; for
he longed to avenge the toil and sorrow that he had suffered for the
sake of Helen. 

The men of Pylos and Arene, and Thryum where is the ford of the river
Alpheus; strong Aipy, Cyparisseis, and Amphigenea; Pteleum, Helos,
and Dorium, where the Muses met Thamyris, and stilled his minstrelsy
for ever. He was returning from Oechalia, where Eurytus lived and
reigned, and boasted that he would surpass even the Muses, daughters
of aegis-bearing Jove, if they should sing against him; whereon they
were angry, and maimed him. They robbed him of his divine power of
song, and thenceforth he could strike the lyre no more. These were
commanded by Nestor, knight of Gerene, and with him there came ninety
ships. 

And those that held Arcadia, under the high mountain of Cyllene, near
the tomb of Aepytus, where the people fight hand to hand; the men
of Pheneus also, and Orchomenus rich in flocks; of Rhipae, Stratie,
and bleak Enispe; of Tegea and fair Mantinea; of Stymphelus and Parrhasia;
of these King Agapenor son of Ancaeus was commander, and they had
sixty ships. Many Arcadians, good soldiers, came in each one of them,
but Agamemnon found them the ships in which to cross the sea, for
they were not a people that occupied their business upon the waters.

The men, moreover, of Buprasium and of Elis, so much of it as is enclosed
between Hyrmine, Myrsinus upon the sea-shore, the rock Olene and Alesium.
These had four leaders, and each of them had ten ships, with many
Epeans on board. Their captains were Amphimachus and Thalpius- the
one, son of Cteatus, and the other, of Eurytus- both of the race of
Actor. The two others were Diores, son of Amarynces, and Polyxenus,
son of King Agasthenes, son of Augeas. 

And those of Dulichium with the sacred Echinean islands, who dwelt
beyond the sea off Elis; these were led by Meges, peer of Mars, and
the son of valiant Phyleus, dear to Jove, who quarrelled with his
father, and went to settle in Dulichium. With him there came forty
ships. 

Ulysses led the brave Cephallenians, who held Ithaca, Neritum with
its forests, Crocylea, rugged Aegilips, Samos and Zacynthus, with
the mainland also that was over against the islands. These were led
by Ulysses, peer of Jove in counsel, and with him there came twelve
ships. 

Thoas, son of Andraemon, commanded the Aetolians, who dwelt in Pleuron,
Olenus, Pylene, Chalcis by the sea, and rocky Calydon, for the great
king Oeneus had now no sons living, and was himself dead, as was also
golden-haired Meleager, who had been set over the Aetolians to be
their king. And with Thoas there came forty ships. 

The famous spearsman Idomeneus led the Cretans, who held Cnossus,
and the well-walled city of Gortys; Lyctus also, Miletus and Lycastus
that lies upon the chalk; the populous towns of Phaestus and Rhytium,
with the other peoples that dwelt in the hundred cities of Crete.
All these were led by Idomeneus, and by Meriones, peer of murderous
Mars. And with these there came eighty ships. 

Tlepolemus, son of Hercules, a man both brave and large of stature,
brought nine ships of lordly warriors from Rhodes. These dwelt in
Rhodes which is divided among the three cities of Lindus, Ielysus,
and Cameirus, that lies upon the chalk. These were commanded by Tlepolemus,
son of Hercules by Astyochea, whom he had carried off from Ephyra,
on the river Selleis, after sacking many cities of valiant warriors.
When Tlepolemus grew up, he killed his father's uncle Licymnius, who
had been a famous warrior in his time, but was then grown old. On
this he built himself a fleet, gathered a great following, and fled
beyond the sea, for he was menaced by the other sons and grandsons
of Hercules. After a voyage. during which he suffered great hardship,
he came to Rhodes, where the people divided into three communities,
according to their tribes, and were dearly loved by Jove, the lord,
of gods and men; wherefore the son of Saturn showered down great riches
upon them. 

And Nireus brought three ships from Syme- Nireus, who was the handsomest
man that came up under Ilius of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus-
but he was a man of no substance, and had but a small following.

And those that held Nisyrus, Crapathus, and Casus, with Cos, the city
of Eurypylus, and the Calydnian islands, these were commanded by Pheidippus
and Antiphus, two sons of King Thessalus the son of Hercules. And
with them there came thirty ships. 

Those again who held Pelasgic Argos, Alos, Alope, and Trachis; and
those of Phthia and Hellas the land of fair women, who were called
Myrmidons, Hellenes, and Achaeans; these had fifty ships, over which
Achilles was in command. But they now took no part in the war, inasmuch
as there was no one to marshal them; for Achilles stayed by his ships,
furious about the loss of the girl Briseis, whom he had taken from
Lyrnessus at his own great peril, when he had sacked Lyrnessus and
Thebe, and had overthrown Mynes and Epistrophus, sons of king Evenor,
son of Selepus. For her sake Achilles was still grieving, but ere
long he was again to join them. 

And those that held Phylace and the flowery meadows of Pyrasus, sanctuary
of Ceres; Iton, the mother of sheep; Antrum upon the sea, and Pteleum
that lies upon the grass lands. Of these brave Protesilaus had been
captain while he was yet alive, but he was now lying under the earth.
He had left a wife behind him in Phylace to tear her cheeks in sorrow,
and his house was only half finished, for he was slain by a Dardanian
warrior while leaping foremost of the Achaeans upon the soil of Troy.
Still, though his people mourned their chieftain, they were not without
a leader, for Podarces, of the race of Mars, marshalled them; he was
son of Iphiclus, rich in sheep, who was the son of Phylacus, and he
was own brother to Protesilaus, only younger, Protesilaus being at
once the elder and the more valiant. So the people were not without
a leader, though they mourned him whom they had lost. With him there
came forty ships. 

And those that held Pherae by the Boebean lake, with Boebe, Glaphyrae,
and the populous city of Iolcus, these with their eleven ships were
led by Eumelus, son of Admetus, whom Alcestis bore to him, loveliest
of the daughters of Pelias. 

And those that held Methone and Thaumacia, with Meliboea and rugged
Olizon, these were led by the skilful archer Philoctetes, and they
had seven ships, each with fifty oarsmen all of them good archers;
but Philoctetes was lying in great pain in the Island of Lemnos, where
the sons of the Achaeans left him, for he had been bitten by a poisonous
water snake. There he lay sick and sorry, and full soon did the Argives
come to miss him. But his people, though they felt his loss were not
leaderless, for Medon, the bastard son of Oileus by Rhene, set them
in array. 

Those, again, of Tricca and the stony region of Ithome, and they that
held Oechalia, the city of Oechalian Eurytus, these were commanded
by the two sons of Aesculapius, skilled in the art of healing, Podalirius
and Machaon. And with them there came thirty ships. 

The men, moreover, of Ormenius, and by the fountain of Hypereia, with
those that held Asterius, and the white crests of Titanus, these were
led by Eurypylus, the son of Euaemon, and with them there came forty
ships. 

Those that held Argissa and Gyrtone, Orthe, Elone, and the white city
of Oloosson, of these brave Polypoetes was leader. He was son of Pirithous,
who was son of Jove himself, for Hippodameia bore him to Pirithous
on the day when he took his revenge on the shaggy mountain savages
and drove them from Mt. Pelion to the Aithices. But Polypoetes was
not sole in command, for with him was Leonteus, of the race of Mars,
who was son of Coronus, the son of Caeneus. And with these there came
forty ships. 

Guneus brought two and twenty ships from Cyphus, and he was followed
by the Enienes and the valiant Peraebi, who dwelt about wintry Dodona,
and held the lands round the lovely river Titaresius, which sends
its waters into the Peneus. They do not mingle with the silver eddies
of the Peneus, but flow on the top of them like oil; for the Titaresius
is a branch of dread Orcus and of the river Styx. 

Of the Magnetes, Prothous son of Tenthredon was commander. They were
they that dwelt about the river Peneus and Mt. Pelion. Prothous, fleet
of foot, was their leader, and with him there came forty ships.

Such were the chiefs and princes of the Danaans. Who, then, O Muse,
was the foremost, whether man or horse, among those that followed
after the sons of Atreus? 

Of the horses, those of the son of Pheres were by far the finest.
They were driven by Eumelus, and were as fleet as birds. They were
of the same age and colour, and perfectly matched in height. Apollo,
of the silver bow, had bred them in Perea- both of them mares, and
terrible as Mars in battle. Of the men, Ajax, son of Telamon, was
much the foremost so long as Achilles' anger lasted, for Achilles
excelled him greatly and he had also better horses; but Achilles was
now holding aloof at his ships by reason of his quarrel with Agamemnon,
and his people passed their time upon the sea shore, throwing discs
or aiming with spears at a mark, and in archery. Their horses stood
each by his own chariot, champing lotus and wild celery. The chariots
were housed under cover, but their owners, for lack of leadership,
wandered hither and thither about the host and went not forth to fight.

Thus marched the host like a consuming fire, and the earth groaned
beneath them when the lord of thunder is angry and lashes the land
about Typhoeus among the Arimi, where they say Typhoeus lies. Even
so did the earth groan beneath them as they sped over the plain.

And now Iris, fleet as the wind, was sent by Jove to tell the bad
news among the Trojans. They were gathered in assembly, old and young,
at Priam's gates, and Iris came close up to Priam, speaking with the
voice of Priam's son Polites, who, being fleet of foot, was stationed
as watchman for the Trojans on the tomb of old Aesyetes, to look out
for any sally of the Achaeans. In his likeness Iris spoke, saying,
"Old man, you talk idly, as in time of peace, while war is at hand.
I have been in many a battle, but never yet saw such a host as is
now advancing. They are crossing the plain to attack the city as thick
as leaves or as the sands of the sea. Hector, I charge you above all
others, do as I say. There are many allies dispersed about the city
of Priam from distant places and speaking divers tongues. Therefore,
let each chief give orders to his own people, setting them severally
in array and leading them forth to battle." 

Thus she spoke, but Hector knew that it was the goddess, and at once
broke up the assembly. The men flew to arms; all the gates were opened,
and the people thronged through them, horse and foot, with the tramp
as of a great multitude. 

Now there is a high mound before the city, rising by itself upon the
plain. Men call it Batieia, but the gods know that it is the tomb
of lithe Myrine. Here the Trojans and their allies divided their forces.

Priam's son, great Hector of the gleaming helmet, commanded the Trojans,
and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most valiant
of those who were longing for the fray. 

The Dardanians were led by brave Aeneas, whom Venus bore to Anchises,
when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain
slopes of Ida. He was not alone, for with him were the two sons of
Antenor, Archilochus and Acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.

They that dwelt in Telea under the lowest spurs of Mt. Ida, men of
substance, who drink the limpid waters of the Aesepus, and are of
Trojan blood- these were led by Pandarus son of Lycaon, whom Apollo
had taught to use the bow. 

They that held Adresteia and the land of Apaesus, with Pityeia, and
the high mountain of Tereia- these were led by Adrestus and Amphius,
whose breastplate was of linen. These were the sons of Merops of Percote,
who excelled in all kinds of divination. He told them not to take
part in the war, but they gave him no heed, for fate lured them to
destruction. 

They that dwelt about Percote and Practius, with Sestos, Abydos, and
Arisbe- these were led by Asius, son of Hyrtacus, a brave commander-
Asius, the son of Hyrtacus, whom his powerful dark bay steeds, of
the breed that comes from the river Selleis, had brought from Arisbe.

Hippothous led the tribes of Pelasgian spearsmen, who dwelt in fertile
Larissa- Hippothous, and Pylaeus of the race of Mars, two sons of
the Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus. 

Acamas and the warrior Peirous commanded the Thracians and those that
came from beyond the mighty stream of the Hellespont. 

Euphemus, son of Troezenus, the son of Ceos, was captain of the Ciconian
spearsmen. 

Pyraechmes led the Paeonian archers from distant Amydon, by the broad
waters of the river Axius, the fairest that flow upon the earth.

The Paphlagonians were commanded by stout-hearted Pylaemanes from
Enetae, where the mules run wild in herds. These were they that held
Cytorus and the country round Sesamus, with the cities by the river
Parthenius, Cromna, Aegialus, and lofty Erithini. 

Odius and Epistrophus were captains over the Halizoni from distant
Alybe, where there are mines of silver. 

Chromis, and Ennomus the augur, led the Mysians, but his skill in
augury availed not to save him from destruction, for he fell by the
hand of the fleet descendant of Aeacus in the river, where he slew
others also of the Trojans. 

Phorcys, again, and noble Ascanius led the Phrygians from the far
country of Ascania, and both were eager for the fray. 

Mesthles and Antiphus commanded the Meonians, sons of Talaemenes,
born to him of the Gygaean lake. These led the Meonians, who dwelt
under Mt. Tmolus. 

Nastes led the Carians, men of a strange speech. These held Miletus
and the wooded mountain of Phthires, with the water of the river Maeander
and the lofty crests of Mt. Mycale. These were commanded by Nastes
and Amphimachus, the brave sons of Nomion. He came into the fight
with gold about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of
no avail to save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the
fleet descendant of Aeacus, and Achilles bore away his gold.

Sarpedon and Glaucus led the Lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the Xanthus. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK III

When the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain,
the Trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream
overhead when rain and winter drive them over the flowing waters of
Oceanus to bring death and destruction on the Pygmies, and they wrangle
in the air as they fly; but the Achaeans marched silently, in high
heart, and minded to stand by one another. 

As when the south wind spreads a curtain of mist upon the mountain
tops, bad for shepherds but better than night for thieves, and a man
can see no further than he can throw a stone, even so rose the dust
from under their feet as they made all speed over the plain.

When they were close up with one another, Alexandrus came forward
as champion on the Trojan side. On his shoulders he bore the skin
of a panther, his bow, and his sword, and he brandished two spears
shod with bronze as a challenge to the bravest of the Achaeans to
meet him in single fight. Menelaus saw him thus stride out before
the ranks, and was glad as a hungry lion that lights on the carcase
of some goat or horned stag, and devours it there and then, though
dogs and youths set upon him. Even thus was Menelaus glad when his
eyes caught sight of Alexandrus, for he deemed that now he should
be revenged. He sprang, therefore, from his chariot, clad in his suit
of armour. 

Alexandrus quailed as he saw Menelaus come forward, and shrank in
fear of his life under cover of his men. As one who starts back affrighted,
trembling and pale, when he comes suddenly upon a serpent in some
mountain glade, even so did Alexandrus plunge into the throng of Trojan
warriors, terror-stricken at the sight of the son Atreus.

Then Hector upbraided him. "Paris," said he, "evil-hearted Paris,
fair to see, but woman-mad, and false of tongue, would that you had
never been born, or that you had died unwed. Better so, than live
to be disgraced and looked askance at. Will not the Achaeans mock
at us and say that we have sent one to champion us who is fair to
see but who has neither wit nor courage? Did you not, such as you
are, get your following together and sail beyond the seas? Did you
not from your a far country carry off a lovely woman wedded among
a people of warriors- to bring sorrow upon your father, your city,
and your whole country, but joy to your enemies, and hang-dog shamefacedness
to yourself? And now can you not dare face Menelaus and learn what
manner of man he is whose wife you have stolen? Where indeed would
be your lyre and your love-tricks, your comely locks and your fair
favour, when you were lying in the dust before him? The Trojans are
a weak-kneed people, or ere this you would have had a shirt of stones
for the wrongs you have done them." 

And Alexandrus answered, "Hector, your rebuke is just. You are hard
as the axe which a shipwright wields at his work, and cleaves the
timber to his liking. As the axe in his hand, so keen is the edge
of your scorn. Still, taunt me not with the gifts that golden Venus
has given me; they are precious; let not a man disdain them, for the
gods give them where they are minded, and none can have them for the
asking. If you would have me do battle with Menelaus, bid the Trojans
and Achaeans take their seats, while he and I fight in their midst
for Helen and all her wealth. Let him who shall be victorious and
prove to be the better man take the woman and all she has, to bear
them to his home, but let the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace
whereby you Trojans shall stay here in Troy, while the others go home
to Argos and the land of the Achaeans." 

When Hector heard this he was glad, and went about among the Trojan
ranks holding his spear by the middle to keep them back, and they
all sat down at his bidding: but the Achaeans still aimed at him with
stones and arrows, till Agamemnon shouted to them saying, "Hold, Argives,
shoot not, sons of the Achaeans; Hector desires to speak."

They ceased taking aim and were still, whereon Hector spoke. "Hear
from my mouth," said he, "Trojans and Achaeans, the saying of Alexandrus,
through whom this quarrel has come about. He bids the Trojans and
Achaeans lay their armour upon the ground, while he and Menelaus fight
in the midst of you for Helen and all her wealth. Let him who shall
be victorious and prove to be the better man take the woman and all
she has, to bear them to his own home, but let the rest swear to a
solemn covenant of peace." 

Thus he spoke, and they all held their peace, till Menelaus of the
loud battle-cry addressed them. "And now," he said, "hear me too,
for it is I who am the most aggrieved. I deem that the parting of
Achaeans and Trojans is at hand, as well it may be, seeing how much
have suffered for my quarrel with Alexandrus and the wrong he did
me. Let him who shall die, die, and let the others fight no more.
Bring, then, two lambs, a white ram and a black ewe, for Earth and
Sun, and we will bring a third for Jove. Moreover, you shall bid Priam
come, that he may swear to the covenant himself; for his sons are
high-handed and ill to trust, and the oaths of Jove must not be transgressed
or taken in vain. Young men's minds are light as air, but when an
old man comes he looks before and after, deeming that which shall
be fairest upon both sides." 

The Trojans and Achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they
thought that they should now have rest. They backed their chariots
toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying
it down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with
a little space between them. Hector sent two messengers to the city
to bring the lambs and to bid Priam come, while Agamemnon told Talthybius
to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as Agamemnon had
said. 

Meanwhile Iris went to Helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife
of the son of Antenor, for Helicaon, son of Antenor, had married Laodice,
the fairest of Priam's daughters. She found her in her own room, working
at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering the
battles between Trojans and Achaeans, that Mars had made them fight
for her sake. Iris then came close up to her and said, "Come hither,
child, and see the strange doings of the Trojans and Achaeans till
now they have been warring upon the plain, mad with lust of battle,
but now they have left off fighting, and are leaning upon their shields,
sitting still with their spears planted beside them. Alexandrus and
Menelaus are going to fight about yourself, and you are to the the
wife of him who is the victor." 

Thus spoke the goddess, and Helen's heart yearned after her former
husband, her city, and her parents. She threw a white mantle over
her head, and hurried from her room, weeping as she went, not alone,
but attended by two of her handmaids, Aethrae, daughter of Pittheus,
and Clymene. And straightway they were at the Scaean gates.

The two sages, Ucalegon and Antenor, elders of the people, were seated
by the Scaean gates, with Priam, Panthous, Thymoetes, Lampus, Clytius,
and Hiketaon of the race of Mars. These were too old to fight, but
they were fluent orators, and sat on the tower like cicales that chirrup
delicately from the boughs of some high tree in a wood. When they
saw Helen coming towards the tower, they said softly to one another,
"Small wonder that Trojans and Achaeans should endure so much and
so long, for the sake of a woman so marvellously and divinely lovely.
Still, fair though she be, let them take her and go, or she will breed
sorrow for us and for our children after us." 

But Priam bade her draw nigh. "My child," said he, "take your seat
in front of me that you may see your former husband, your kinsmen
and your friends. I lay no blame upon you, it is the gods, not you
who are to blame. It is they that have brought about this terrible
war with the Achaeans. Tell me, then, who is yonder huge hero so great
and goodly? I have seen men taller by a head, but none so comely and
so royal. Surely he must be a king." 

"Sir," answered Helen, "father of my husband, dear and reverend in
my eyes, would that I had chosen death rather than to have come here
with your son, far from my bridal chamber, my friends, my darling
daughter, and all the companions of my girlhood. But it was not to
be, and my lot is one of tears and sorrow. As for your question, the
hero of whom you ask is Agamemnon, son of Atreus, a good king and
a brave soldier, brother-in-law as surely as that he lives, to my
abhorred and miserable self." 

The old man marvelled at him and said, "Happy son of Atreus, child
of good fortune. I see that the Achaeans are subject to you in great
multitudes. When I was in Phrygia I saw much horsemen, the people
of Otreus and of Mygdon, who were camping upon the banks of the river
Sangarius; I was their ally, and with them when the Amazons, peers
of men, came up against them, but even they were not so many as the
Achaeans." 

The old man next looked upon Ulysses; "Tell me," he said, "who is
that other, shorter by a head than Agamemnon, but broader across the
chest and shoulders? His armour is laid upon the ground, and he stalks
in front of the ranks as it were some great woolly ram ordering his
ewes." 

And Helen answered, "He is Ulysses, a man of great craft, son of Laertes.
He was born in rugged Ithaca, and excels in all manner of stratagems
and subtle cunning." 

On this Antenor said, "Madam, you have spoken truly. Ulysses once
came here as envoy about yourself, and Menelaus with him. I received
them in my own house, and therefore know both of them by sight and
conversation. When they stood up in presence of the assembled Trojans,
Menelaus was the broader shouldered, but when both were seated Ulysses
had the more royal presence. After a time they delivered their message,
and the speech of Menelaus ran trippingly on the tongue; he did not
say much, for he was a man of few words, but he spoke very clearly
and to the point, though he was the younger man of the two; Ulysses,
on the other hand, when he rose to speak, was at first silent and
kept his eyes fixed upon the ground. There was no play nor graceful
movement of his sceptre; he kept it straight and stiff like a man
unpractised in oratory- one might have taken him for a mere churl
or simpleton; but when he raised his voice, and the words came driving
from his deep chest like winter snow before the wind, then there was
none to touch him, and no man thought further of what he looked like."

Priam then caught sight of Ajax and asked, "Who is that great and
goodly warrior whose head and broad shoulders tower above the rest
of the Argives?" 

"That," answered Helen, "is huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans, and
on the other side of him, among the Cretans, stands Idomeneus looking
like a god, and with the captains of the Cretans round him. Often
did Menelaus receive him as a guest in our house when he came visiting
us from Crete. I see, moreover, many other Achaeans whose names I
could tell you, but there are two whom I can nowhere find, Castor,
breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer; they are children
of my mother, and own brothers to myself. Either they have not left
Lacedaemon, or else, though they have brought their ships, they will
not show themselves in battle for the shame and disgrace that I have
brought upon them." 

She knew not that both these heroes were already lying under the earth
in their own land of Lacedaemon. 

Meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy oath-offerings through
the city- two lambs and a goatskin of wine, the gift of earth; and
Idaeus brought the mixing bowl and the cups of gold. He went up to
Priam and said, "Son of Laomedon, the princes of the Trojans and Achaeans
bid you come down on to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant.
Alexandrus and Menelaus are to fight for Helen in single combat, that
she and all her wealth may go with him who is the victor. We are to
swear to a solemn covenant of peace whereby we others shall dwell
here in Troy, while the Achaeans return to Argos and the land of the
Achaeans." 

The old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the
horses, and they made all haste to do so. He mounted the chariot,
gathered the reins in his hand, and Antenor took his seat beside him;
they then drove through the Scaean gates on to the plain. When they
reached the ranks of the Trojans and Achaeans they left the chariot,
and with measured pace advanced into the space between the hosts.

Agamemnon and Ulysses both rose to meet them. The attendants brought
on the oath-offerings and mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls; they
poured water over the hands of the chieftains, and the son of Atreus
drew the dagger that hung by his sword, and cut wool from the lambs'
heads; this the men-servants gave about among the Trojan and Achaean
princes, and the son of Atreus lifted up his hands in prayer. "Father
Jove," he cried, "that rulest in Ida, most glorious in power, and
thou oh Sun, that seest and givest ear to all things, Earth and Rivers,
and ye who in the realms below chastise the soul of him that has broken
his oath, witness these rites and guard them, that they be not vain.
If Alexandrus kills Menelaus, let him keep Helen and all her wealth,
while we sail home with our ships; but if Menelaus kills Alexandrus,
let the Trojans give back Helen and all that she has; let them moreover
pay such fine to the Achaeans as shall be agreed upon, in testimony
among those that shall be born hereafter. Aid if Priam and his sons
refuse such fine when Alexandrus has fallen, then will I stay here
and fight on till I have got satisfaction." 

As he spoke he drew his knife across the throats of the victims, and
laid them down gasping and dying upon the ground, for the knife had
reft them of their strength. Then they poured wine from the mixing-bowl
into the cups, and prayed to the everlasting gods, saying, Trojans
and Achaeans among one another, "Jove, most great and glorious, and
ye other everlasting gods, grant that the brains of them who shall
first sin against their oaths- of them and their children- may be
shed upon the ground even as this wine, and let their wives become
the slaves of strangers." 

Thus they prayed, but not as yet would Jove grant them their prayer.
Then Priam, descendant of Dardanus, spoke, saying, "Hear me, Trojans
and Achaeans, I will now go back to the wind-beaten city of Ilius:
I dare not with my own eyes witness this fight between my son and
Menelaus, for Jove and the other immortals alone know which shall
fall." 

On this he laid the two lambs on his chariot and took his seat. He
gathered the reins in his hand, and Antenor sat beside him; the two
then went back to Ilius. Hector and Ulysses measured the ground, and
cast lots from a helmet of bronze to see which should take aim first.
Meanwhile the two hosts lifted up their hands and prayed saying, "Father
Jove, that rulest from Ida, most glorious in power, grant that he
who first brought about this war between us may die, and enter the
house of Hades, while we others remain at peace and abide by our oaths."

Great Hector now turned his head aside while he shook the helmet,
and the lot of Paris flew out first. The others took their several
stations, each by his horses and the place where his arms were lying,
while Alexandrus, husband of lovely Helen, put on his goodly armour.
First he greaved his legs with greaves of good make and fitted with
ancle-clasps of silver; after this he donned the cuirass of his brother
Lycaon, and fitted it to his own body; he hung his silver-studded
sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then his mighty shield. On
his comely head he set his helmet, well-wrought, with a crest of horse-hair
that nodded menacingly above it, and he grasped a redoubtable spear
that suited his hands. In like fashion Menelaus also put on his armour.

When they had thus armed, each amid his own people, they strode fierce
of aspect into the open space, and both Trojans and Achaeans were
struck with awe as they beheld them. They stood near one another on
the measured ground, brandishing their spears, and each furious against
the other. Alexandrus aimed first, and struck the round shield of
the son of Atreus, but the spear did not pierce it, for the shield
turned its point. Menelaus next took aim, praying to Father Jove as
he did so. "King Jove," he said, "grant me revenge on Alexandrus who
has wronged me; subdue him under my hand that in ages yet to come
a man may shrink from doing ill deeds in the house of his host."

He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it at the shield of Alexandrus.
Through shield and cuirass it went, and tore the shirt by his flank,
but Alexandrus swerved aside, and thus saved his life. Then the son
of Atreus drew his sword, and drove at the projecting part of his
helmet, but the sword fell shivered in three or four pieces from his
hand, and he cried, looking towards Heaven, "Father Jove, of all gods
thou art the most despiteful; I made sure of my revenge, but the sword
has broken in my hand, my spear has been hurled in vain, and I have
not killed him." 

With this he flew at Alexandrus, caught him by the horsehair plume
of his helmet, and began dragging him towards the Achaeans. The strap
of the helmet that went under his chin was choking him, and Menelaus
would have dragged him off to his own great glory had not Jove's daughter
Venus been quick to mark and to break the strap of oxhide, so that
the empty helmet came away in his hand. This he flung to his comrades
among the Achaeans, and was again springing upon Alexandrus to run
him through with a spear, but Venus snatched him up in a moment (as
a god can do), hid him under a cloud of darkness, and conveyed him
to his own bedchamber. 

Then she went to call Helen, and found her on a high tower with the
Trojan women crowding round her. She took the form of an old woman
who used to dress wool for her when she was still in Lacedaemon, and
of whom she was very fond. Thus disguised she plucked her by perfumed
robe and said, "Come hither; Alexandrus says you are to go to the
house; he is on his bed in his own room, radiant with beauty and dressed
in gorgeous apparel. No one would think he had just come from fighting,
but rather that he was going to a dance, or had done dancing and was
sitting down." 

With these words she moved the heart of Helen to anger. When she marked
the beautiful neck of the goddess, her lovely bosom, and sparkling
eyes, she marvelled at her and said, "Goddess, why do you thus beguile
me? Are you going to send me afield still further to some man whom
you have taken up in Phrygia or fair Meonia? Menelaus has just vanquished
Alexandrus, and is to take my hateful self back with him. You are
come here to betray me. Go sit with Alexandrus yourself; henceforth
be goddess no longer; never let your feet carry you back to Olympus;
worry about him and look after him till he make you his wife, or,
for the matter of that, his slave- but me? I shall not go; I can garnish
his bed no longer; I should be a by-word among all the women of Troy.
Besides, I have trouble on my mind." 

Venus was very angry, and said, "Bold hussy, do not provoke me; if
you do, I shall leave you to your fate and hate you as much as I have
loved you. I will stir up fierce hatred between Trojans and Achaeans,
and you shall come to a bad end." 

At this Helen was frightened. She wrapped her mantle about her and
went in silence, following the goddess and unnoticed by the Trojan
women. 

When they came to the house of Alexandrus the maid-servants set about
their work, but Helen went into her own room, and the laughter-loving
goddess took a seat and set it for her facing Alexandrus. On this
Helen, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, sat down, and with eyes askance
began to upbraid her husband. 

"So you are come from the fight," said she; "would that you had fallen
rather by the hand of that brave man who was my husband. You used
to brag that you were a better man with hands and spear than Menelaus.
go, but I then, an challenge him again- but I should advise you not
to do so, for if you are foolish enough to meet him in single combat,
you will soon all by his spear." 

And Paris answered, "Wife, do not vex me with your reproaches. This
time, with the help of Minerva, Menelaus has vanquished me; another
time I may myself be victor, for I too have gods that will stand by
me. Come, let us lie down together and make friends. Never yet was
I so passionately enamoured of you as at this moment- not even when
I first carried you off from Lacedaemon and sailed away with you-
not even when I had converse with you upon the couch of love in the
island of Cranae was I so enthralled by desire of you as now." On
this he led her towards the bed, and his wife went with him.

Thus they laid themselves on the bed together; but the son of Atreus
strode among the throng, looking everywhere for Alexandrus, and no
man, neither of the Trojans nor of the allies, could find him. If
they had seen him they were in no mind to hide him, for they all of
them hated him as they did death itself. Then Agamemnon, king of men,
spoke, saying, "Hear me, Trojans, Dardanians, and allies. The victory
has been with Menelaus; therefore give back Helen with all her wealth,
and pay such fine as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among them
that shall be born hereafter." 

Thus spoke the son of Atreus, and the Achaeans shouted in applause.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IV

Now the gods were sitting with Jove in council upon the golden floor
while Hebe went round pouring out nectar for them to drink, and as
they pledged one another in their cups of gold they looked down upon
the town of Troy. The son of Saturn then began to tease Juno, talking
at her so as to provoke her. "Menelaus," said he, "has two good friends
among the goddesses, Juno of Argos, and Minerva of Alalcomene, but
they only sit still and look on, while Venus keeps ever by Alexandrus'
side to defend him in any danger; indeed she has just rescued him
when he made sure that it was all over with him- for the victory really
did lie with Menelaus. We must consider what we shall do about all
this; shall we set them fighting anew or make peace between them?
If you will agree to this last Menelaus can take back Helen and the
city of Priam may remain still inhabited." 

Minerva and Juno muttered their discontent as they sat side by side
hatching mischief for the Trojans. Minerva scowled at her father,
for she was in a furious passion with him, and said nothing, but Juno
could not contain herself. "Dread son of Saturn," said she, "what,
pray, is the meaning of all this? Is my trouble, then, to go for nothing,
and the sweat that I have sweated, to say nothing of my horses, while
getting the people together against Priam and his children? Do as
you will, but we other gods shall not all of us approve your counsel."

Jove was angry and answered, "My dear, what harm have Priam and his
sons done you that you are so hotly bent on sacking the city of Ilius?
Will nothing do for you but you must within their walls and eat Priam
raw, with his sons and all the other Trojans to boot? Have it your
own way then; for I would not have this matter become a bone of contention
between us. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, if ever
I want to sack a city belonging to friends of yours, you must not
try to stop me; you will have to let me do it, for I am giving in
to you sorely against my will. Of all inhabited cities under the sun
and stars of heaven, there was none that I so much respected as Ilius
with Priam and his whole people. Equitable feasts were never wanting
about my altar, nor the savour of burning fat, which is honour due
to ourselves." 

"My own three favourite cities," answered Juno, "are Argos, Sparta,
and Mycenae. Sack them whenever you may be displeased with them. I
shall not defend them and I shall not care. Even if I did, and tried
to stay you, I should take nothing by it, for you are much stronger
than I am, but I will not have my own work wasted. I too am a god
and of the same race with yourself. I am Saturn's eldest daughter,
and am honourable not on this ground only, but also because I am your
wife, and you are king over the gods. Let it be a case, then, of give-and-take
between us, and the rest of the gods will follow our lead. Tell Minerva
to go and take part in the fight at once, and let her contrive that
the Trojans shall be the first to break their oaths and set upon the
Achaeans." 

The sire of gods and men heeded her words, and said to Minerva, "Go
at once into the Trojan and Achaean hosts, and contrive that the Trojans
shall be the first to break their oaths and set upon the Achaeans."

This was what Minerva was already eager to do, so down she darted
from the topmost summits of Olympus. She shot through the sky as some
brilliant meteor which the son of scheming Saturn has sent as a sign
to mariners or to some great army, and a fiery train of light follows
in its wake. The Trojans and Achaeans were struck with awe as they
beheld, and one would turn to his neighbour, saying, "Either we shall
again have war and din of combat, or Jove the lord of battle will
now make peace between us." 

Thus did they converse. Then Minerva took the form of Laodocus, son
of Antenor, and went through the ranks of the Trojans to find Pandarus,
the redoubtable son of Lycaon. She found him standing among the stalwart
heroes who had followed him from the banks of the Aesopus, so she
went close up to him and said, "Brave son of Lycaon, will you do as
I tell you? If you dare send an arrow at Menelaus you will win honour
and thanks from all the Trojans, and especially from prince Alexandrus-
he would be the first to requite you very handsomely if he could see
Menelaus mount his funeral pyre, slain by an arrow from your hand.
Take your home aim then, and pray to Lycian Apollo, the famous archer;
vow that when you get home to your strong city of Zelea you will offer
a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour." 

His fool's heart was persuaded, and he took his bow from its case.
This bow was made from the horns of a wild ibex which he had killed
as it was bounding from a rock; he had stalked it, and it had fallen
as the arrow struck it to the heart. Its horns were sixteen palms
long, and a worker in horn had made them into a bow, smoothing them
well down, and giving them tips of gold. When Pandarus had strung
his bow he laid it carefully on the ground, and his brave followers
held their shields before him lest the Achaeans should set upon him
before he had shot Menelaus. Then he opened the lid of his quiver
and took out a winged arrow that had yet been shot, fraught with the
pangs of death. He laid the arrow on the string and prayed to Lycian
Apollo, the famous archer, vowing that when he got home to his strong
city of Zelea he would offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his
honour. He laid the notch of the arrow on the oxhide bowstring, and
drew both notch and string to his breast till the arrow-head was near
the bow; then when the bow was arched into a half-circle he let fly,
and the bow twanged, and the string sang as the arrow flew gladly
on over the heads of the throng. 

But the blessed gods did not forget thee, O Menelaus, and Jove's daughter,
driver of the spoil, was the first to stand before thee and ward off
the piercing arrow. She turned it from his skin as a mother whisks
a fly from off her child when it is sleeping sweetly; she guided it
to the part where the golden buckles of the belt that passed over
his double cuirass were fastened, so the arrow struck the belt that
went tightly round him. It went right through this and through the
cuirass of cunning workmanship; it also pierced the belt beneath it,
which he wore next his skin to keep out darts or arrows; it was this
that served him in the best stead, nevertheless the arrow went through
it and grazed the top of the skin, so that blood began flowing from
the wound. 

As when some woman of Meonia or Caria strains purple dye on to a piece
of ivory that is to be the cheek-piece of a horse, and is to be laid
up in a treasure house- many a knight is fain to bear it, but the
king keeps it as an ornament of which both horse and driver may be
proud- even so, O Menelaus, were your shapely thighs and your legs
down to your fair ancles stained with blood. 

When King Agamemnon saw the blood flowing from the wound he was afraid,
and so was brave Menelaus himself till he saw that the barbs of the
arrow and the thread that bound the arrow-head to the shaft were still
outside the wound. Then he took heart, but Agamemnon heaved a deep
sigh as he held Menelaus's hand in his own, and his comrades made
moan in concert. "Dear brother, "he cried, "I have been the death
of you in pledging this covenant and letting you come forward as our
champion. The Trojans have trampled on their oaths and have wounded
you; nevertheless the oath, the blood of lambs, the drink-offerings
and the right hands of fellowship in which have put our trust shall
not be vain. If he that rules Olympus fulfil it not here and now,
he. will yet fulfil it hereafter, and they shall pay dearly with their
lives and with their wives and children. The day will surely come
when mighty Ilius shall be laid low, with Priam and Priam's people,
when the son of Saturn from his high throne shall overshadow them
with his awful aegis in punishment of their present treachery. This
shall surely be; but how, Menelaus, shall I mourn you, if it be your
lot now to die? I should return to Argos as a by-word, for the Achaeans
will at once go home. We shall leave Priam and the Trojans the glory
of still keeping Helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie
here at Troy with your purpose not fulfilled. Then shall some braggart
Trojan leap upon your tomb and say, 'Ever thus may Agamemnon wreak
his vengeance; he brought his army in vain; he is gone home to his
own land with empty ships, and has left Menelaus behind him.' Thus
will one of them say, and may the earth then swallow me."

But Menelaus reassured him and said, "Take heart, and do not alarm
the people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal part, for my outer
belt of burnished metal first stayed it, and under this my cuirass
and the belt of mail which the bronze-smiths made me." 

And Agamemnon answered, "I trust, dear Menelaus, that it may be even
so, but the surgeon shall examine your wound and lay herbs upon it
to relieve your pain." 

He then said to Talthybius, "Talthybius, tell Machaon, son to the
great physician, Aesculapius, to come and see Menelaus immediately.
Some Trojan or Lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our
dismay, and to his own great glory." 

Talthybius did as he was told, and went about the host trying to find
Machaon. Presently he found standing amid the brave warriors who had
followed him from Tricca; thereon he went up to him and said, "Son
of Aesculapius, King Agamemnon says you are to come and see Menelaus
immediately. Some Trojan or Lycian archer has wounded him with an
arrow to our dismay and to his own great glory." 

Thus did he speak, and Machaon was moved to go. They passed through
the spreading host of the Achaeans and went on till they came to the
place where Menelaus had been wounded and was lying with the chieftains
gathered in a circle round him. Machaon passed into the middle of
the ring and at once drew the arrow from the belt, bending its barbs
back through the force with which he pulled it out. He undid the burnished
belt, and beneath this the cuirass and the belt of mail which the
bronze-smiths had made; then, when he had seen the wound, he wiped
away the blood and applied some soothing drugs which Chiron had given
to Aesculapius out of the good will he bore him. 

While they were thus busy about Menelaus, the Trojans came forward
against them, for they had put on their armour, and now renewed the
fight. 

You would not have then found Agamemnon asleep nor cowardly and unwilling
to fight, but eager rather for the fray. He left his chariot rich
with bronze and his panting steeds in charge of Eurymedon, son of
Ptolemaeus the son of Peiraeus, and bade him hold them in readiness
against the time his limbs should weary of going about and giving
orders to so many, for he went among the ranks on foot. When he saw
men hasting to the front he stood by them and cheered them on. "Argives,"
said he, "slacken not one whit in your onset; father Jove will be
no helper of liars; the Trojans have been the first to break their
oaths and to attack us; therefore they shall be devoured of vultures;
we shall take their city and carry off their wives and children in
our ships." 

But he angrily rebuked those whom he saw shirking and disinclined
to fight. "Argives," he cried, "cowardly miserable creatures, have
you no shame to stand here like frightened fawns who, when they can
no longer scud over the plain, huddle together, but show no fight?
You are as dazed and spiritless as deer. Would you wait till the Trojans
reach the sterns of our ships as they lie on the shore, to see, whether
the son of Saturn will hold his hand over you to protect you?"

Thus did he go about giving his orders among the ranks. Passing through
the crowd, he came presently on the Cretans, arming round Idomeneus,
who was at their head, fierce as a wild boar, while Meriones was bringing
up the battalions that were in the rear. Agamemnon was glad when he
saw him, and spoke him fairly. "Idomeneus," said he, "I treat you
with greater distinction than I do any others of the Achaeans, whether
in war or in other things, or at table. When the princes are mixing
my choicest wines in the mixing-bowls, they have each of them a fixed
allowance, but your cup is kept always full like my own, that you
may drink whenever you are minded. Go, therefore, into battle, and
show yourself the man you have been always proud to be."

Idomeneus answered, "I will be a trusty comrade, as I promised you
from the first I would be. Urge on the other Achaeans, that we may
join battle at once, for the Trojans have trampled upon their covenants.
Death and destruction shall be theirs, seeing they have been the first
to break their oaths and to attack us." 

The son of Atreus went on, glad at heart, till he came upon the two
Ajaxes arming themselves amid a host of foot-soldiers. As when a goat-herd
from some high post watches a storm drive over the deep before the
west wind- black as pitch is the offing and a mighty whirlwind draws
towards him, so that he is afraid and drives his flock into a cave-
even thus did the ranks of stalwart youths move in a dark mass to
battle under the Ajaxes, horrid with shield and spear. Glad was King
Agamemnon when he saw them. "No need," he cried, "to give orders to
such leaders of the Argives as you are, for of your own selves you
spur your men on to fight with might and main. Would, by father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo that all were so minded as you are, for the city
of Priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack
it." 

With this he left them and went onward to Nestor, the facile speaker
of the Pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in
company with Pelagon, Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, and Bias shepherd
of his people. He placed his knights with their chariots and horses
in the front rank, while the foot-soldiers, brave men and many, whom
he could trust, were in the rear. The cowards he drove into the middle,
that they might fight whether they would or no. He gave his orders
to the knights first, bidding them hold their horses well in hand,
so as to avoid confusion. "Let no man," he said, "relying on his strength
or horsemanship, get before the others and engage singly with the
Trojans, nor yet let him lag behind or you will weaken your attack;
but let each when he meets an enemy's chariot throw his spear from
his own; this be much the best; this is how the men of old took towns
and strongholds; in this wise were they minded." 

Thus did the old man charge them, for he had been in many a fight,
and King Agamemnon was glad. "I wish," he said to him, that your limbs
were as supple and your strength as sure as your judgment is; but
age, the common enemy of mankind, has laid his hand upon you; would
that it had fallen upon some other, and that you were still young."

And Nestor, knight of Gerene, answered, "Son of Atreus, I too would
gladly be the man I was when I slew mighty Ereuthalion; but the gods
will not give us everything at one and the same time. I was then young,
and now I am old; still I can go with my knights and give them that
counsel which old men have a right to give. The wielding of the spear
I leave to those who are younger and stronger than myself."

Agamemnon went his way rejoicing, and presently found Menestheus,
son of Peteos, tarrying in his place, and with him were the Athenians
loud of tongue in battle. Near him also tarried cunning Ulysses, with
his sturdy Cephallenians round him; they had not yet heard the battle-cry,
for the ranks of Trojans and Achaeans had only just begun to move,
so they were standing still, waiting for some other columns of the
Achaeans to attack the Trojans and begin the fighting. When he saw
this Agamemnon rebuked them and said, "Son of Peteos, and you other,
steeped in cunning, heart of guile, why stand you here cowering and
waiting on others? You two should be of all men foremost when there
is hard fighting to be done, for you are ever foremost to accept my
invitation when we councillors of the Achaeans are holding feast.
You are glad enough then to take your fill of roast meats and to drink
wine as long as you please, whereas now you would not care though
you saw ten columns of Achaeans engage the enemy in front of you."

Ulysses glared at him and answered, "Son of Atreus, what are you talking
about? How can you say that we are slack? When the Achaeans are in
full fight with the Trojans, you shall see, if you care to do so,
that the father of Telemachus will join battle with the foremost of
them. You are talking idly." 

When Agamemnon saw that Ulysses was angry, he smiled pleasantly at
him and withdrew his words. "Ulysses," said he, "noble son of Laertes,
excellent in all good counsel, I have neither fault to find nor orders
to give you, for I know your heart is right, and that you and I are
of a mind. Enough; I will make you amends for what I have said, and
if any ill has now been spoken may the gods bring it to nothing."

He then left them and went on to others. Presently he saw the son
of Tydeus, noble Diomed, standing by his chariot and horses, with
Sthenelus the son of Capaneus beside him; whereon he began to upbraid
him. "Son of Tydeus," he said, "why stand you cowering here upon the
brink of battle? Tydeus did not shrink thus, but was ever ahead of
his men when leading them on against the foe- so, at least, say they
that saw him in battle, for I never set eyes upon him myself. They
say that there was no man like him. He came once to Mycenae, not as
an enemy but as a guest, in company with Polynices to recruit his
forces, for they were levying war against the strong city of Thebes,
and prayed our people for a body of picked men to help them. The men
of Mycenae were willing to let them have one, but Jove dissuaded them
by showing them unfavourable omens. Tydeus, therefore, and Polynices
went their way. When they had got as far the deep-meadowed and rush-grown
banks of the Aesopus, the Achaeans sent Tydeus as their envoy, and
he found the Cadmeans gathered in great numbers to a banquet in the
house of Eteocles. Stranger though he was, he knew no fear on finding
himself single-handed among so many, but challenged them to contests
of all kinds, and in each one of them was at once victorious, so mightily
did Minerva help him. The Cadmeans were incensed at his success, and
set a force of fifty youths with two captains- the godlike hero Maeon,
son of Haemon, and Polyphontes, son of Autophonus- at their head,
to lie in wait for him on his return journey; but Tydeus slew every
man of them, save only Maeon, whom he let go in obedience to heaven's
omens. Such was Tydeus of Aetolia. His son can talk more glibly, but
he cannot fight as his father did." 

Diomed made no answer, for he was shamed by the rebuke of Agamemnon;
but the son of Capaneus took up his words and said, "Son of Atreus,
tell no lies, for you can speak truth if you will. We boast ourselves
as even better men than our fathers; we took seven-gated Thebes, though
the wall was stronger and our men were fewer in number, for we trusted
in the omens of the gods and in the help of Jove, whereas they perished
through their own sheer folly; hold not, then, our fathers in like
honour with us." 

Diomed looked sternly at him and said, "Hold your peace, my friend,
as I bid you. It is not amiss that Agamemnon should urge the Achaeans
forward, for the glory will be his if we take the city, and his the
shame if we are vanquished. Therefore let us acquit ourselves with
valour." 

As he spoke he sprang from his chariot, and his armour rang so fiercely
about his body that even a brave man might well have been scared to
hear it. 

As when some mighty wave that thunders on the beach when the west
wind has lashed it into fury- it has reared its head afar and now
comes crashing down on the shore; it bows its arching crest high over
the jagged rocks and spews its salt foam in all directions- even so
did the serried phalanxes of the Danaans march steadfastly to battle.
The chiefs gave orders each to his own people, but the men said never
a word; no man would think it, for huge as the host was, it seemed
as though there was not a tongue among them, so silent were they in
their obedience; and as they marched the armour about their bodies
glistened in the sun. But the clamour of the Trojan ranks was as that
of many thousand ewes that stand waiting to be milked in the yards
of some rich flockmaster, and bleat incessantly in answer to the bleating
of their lambs; for they had not one speech nor language, but their
tongues were diverse, and they came from many different places. These
were inspired of Mars, but the others by Minerva- and with them came
Panic, Rout, and Strife whose fury never tires, sister and friend
of murderous Mars, who, from being at first but low in stature, grows
till she uprears her head to heaven, though her feet are still on
earth. She it was that went about among them and flung down discord
to the waxing of sorrow with even hand between them. 

When they were got together in one place shield clashed with shield
and spear with spear in the rage of battle. The bossed shields beat
one upon another, and there was a tramp as of a great multitude- death-cry
and shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red with
blood. As torrents swollen with rain course madly down their deep
channels till the angry floods meet in some gorge, and the shepherd
the hillside hears their roaring from afar- even such was the toil
and uproar of the hosts as they joined in battle. 

First Antilochus slew an armed warrior of the Trojans, Echepolus,
son of Thalysius, fighting in the foremost ranks. He struck at the
projecting part of his helmet and drove the spear into his brow; the
point of bronze pierced the bone, and darkness veiled his eyes; headlong
as a tower he fell amid the press of the fight, and as he dropped
King Elephenor, son of Chalcodon and captain of the proud Abantes
began dragging him out of reach of the darts that were falling around
him, in haste to strip him of his armour. But his purpose was not
for long; Agenor saw him haling the body away, and smote him in the
side with his bronze-shod spear- for as he stooped his side was left
unprotected by his shield- and thus he perished. Then the fight between
Trojans and Achaeans grew furious over his body, and they flew upon
each other like wolves, man and man crushing one upon the other.

Forthwith Ajax, son of Telamon, slew the fair youth Simoeisius, son
of Anthemion, whom his mother bore by the banks of the Simois, as
she was coming down from Mt. Ida, where she had been with her parents
to see their flocks. Therefore he was named Simoeisius, but he did
not live to pay his parents for his rearing, for he was cut off untimely
by the spear of mighty Ajax, who struck him in the breast by the right
nipple as he was coming on among the foremost fighters; the spear
went right through his shoulder, and he fell as a poplar that has
grown straight and tall in a meadow by some mere, and its top is thick
with branches. Then the wheelwright lays his axe to its roots that
he may fashion a felloe for the wheel of some goodly chariot, and
it lies seasoning by the waterside. In such wise did Ajax fell to
earth Simoeisius, son of Anthemion. Thereon Antiphus of the gleaming
corslet, son of Priam, hurled a spear at Ajax from amid the crowd
and missed him, but he hit Leucus, the brave comrade of Ulysses, in
the groin, as he was dragging the body of Simoeisius over to the other
side; so he fell upon the body and loosed his hold upon it. Ulysses
was furious when he saw Leucus slain, and strode in full armour through
the front ranks till he was quite close; then he glared round about
him and took aim, and the Trojans fell back as he did so. His dart
was not sped in vain, for it struck Democoon, the bastard son of Priam,
who had come to him from Abydos, where he had charge of his father's
mares. Ulysses, infuriated by the death of his comrade, hit him with
his spear on one temple, and the bronze point came through on the
other side of his forehead. Thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Hector, and they that were in front, then gave round while the Argives
raised a shout and drew off the dead, pressing further forward as
they did so. But Apollo looked down from Pergamus and called aloud
to the Trojans, for he was displeased. "Trojans," he cried, "rush
on the foe, and do not let yourselves be thus beaten by the Argives.
Their skins are not stone nor iron that when hit them you do them
no harm. Moreover, Achilles, the son of lovely Thetis, is not fighting,
but is nursing his anger at the ships." 

Thus spoke the mighty god, crying to them from the city, while Jove's
redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, went about among the host of
the Achaeans, and urged them forward whenever she beheld them slackening.

Then fate fell upon Diores, son of Amarynceus, for he was struck by
a jagged stone near the ancle of his right leg. He that hurled it
was Peirous, son of Imbrasus, captain of the Thracians, who had come
from Aenus; the bones and both the tendons were crushed by the pitiless
stone. He fell to the ground on his back, and in his death throes
stretched out his hands towards his comrades. But Peirous, who had
wounded him, sprang on him and thrust a spear into his belly, so that
his bowels came gushing out upon the ground, and darkness veiled his
eyes. As he was leaving the body, Thoas of Aetolia struck him in the
chest near the nipple, and the point fixed itself in his lungs. Thoas
came close up to him, pulled the spear out of his chest, and then
drawing his sword, smote him in the middle of the belly so that he
died; but he did not strip him of his armour, for his Thracian comrades,
men who wear their hair in a tuft at the top of their heads, stood
round the body and kept him off with their long spears for all his
great stature and valour; so he was driven back. Thus the two corpses
lay stretched on earth near to one another, the one captain of the
Thracians and the other of the Epeans; and many another fell round
them. 

And now no man would have made light of the fighting if he could have
gone about among it scatheless and unwounded, with Minerva leading
him by the hand, and protecting him from the storm of spears and arrows.
For many Trojans and Achaeans on that day lay stretched side by side
face downwards upon the earth. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK V

Then Pallas Minerva put valour into the heart of Diomed, son of Tydeus,
that he might excel all the other Argives, and cover himself with
glory. She made a stream of fire flare from his shield and helmet
like the star that shines most brilliantly in summer after its bath
in the waters of Oceanus- even such a fire did she kindle upon his
head and shoulders as she bade him speed into the thickest hurly-burly
of the fight. 

Now there was a certain rich and honourable man among the Trojans,
priest of Vulcan, and his name was Dares. He had two sons, Phegeus
and Idaeus, both of them skilled in all the arts of war. These two
came forward from the main body of Trojans, and set upon Diomed, he
being on foot, while they fought from their chariot. When they were
close up to one another, Phegeus took aim first, but his spear went
over Diomed's left shoulder without hitting him. Diomed then threw,
and his spear sped not in vain, for it hit Phegeus on the breast near
the nipple, and he fell from his chariot. Idaeus did not dare to bestride
his brother's body, but sprang from the chariot and took to flight,
or he would have shared his brother's fate; whereon Vulcan saved him
by wrapping him in a cloud of darkness, that his old father might
not be utterly overwhelmed with grief; but the son of Tydeus drove
off with the horses, and bade his followers take them to the ships.
The Trojans were scared when they saw the two sons of Dares, one of
them in fright and the other lying dead by his chariot. Minerva, therefore,
took Mars by the hand and said, "Mars, Mars, bane of men, bloodstained
stormer of cities, may we not now leave the Trojans and Achaeans to
fight it out, and see to which of the two Jove will vouchsafe the
victory? Let us go away, and thus avoid his anger." 

So saying, she drew Mars out of the battle, and set him down upon
the steep banks of the Scamander. Upon this the Danaans drove the
Trojans back, and each one of their chieftains killed his man. First
King Agamemnon flung mighty Odius, captain of the Halizoni, from his
chariot. The spear of Agamemnon caught him on the broad of his back,
just as he was turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders
and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round
him as he fell heavily to the ground. 

Then Idomeneus killed Phaesus, son of Borus the Meonian, who had come
from Varne. Mighty Idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as
he was mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshrouded
him as he fell heavily from the car. 

The squires of Idomeneus spoiled him of his armour, while Menelaus,
son of Atreus, killed Scamandrius the son of Strophius, a mighty huntsman
and keen lover of the chase. Diana herself had taught him how to kill
every kind of wild creature that is bred in mountain forests, but
neither she nor his famed skill in archery could now save him, for
the spear of Menelaus struck him in the back as he was flying; it
struck him between the shoulders and went right through his chest,
so that he fell headlong and his armour rang rattling round him.

Meriones then killed Phereclus the son of Tecton, who was the son
of Hermon, a man whose hand was skilled in all manner of cunning workmanship,
for Pallas Minerva had dearly loved him. He it was that made the ships
for Alexandrus, which were the beginning of all mischief, and brought
evil alike both on the Trojans and on Alexandrus himself; for he heeded
not the decrees of heaven. Meriones overtook him as he was flying,
and struck him on the right buttock. The point of the spear went through
the bone into the bladder, and death came upon him as he cried aloud
and fell forward on his knees. 

Meges, moreover, slew Pedaeus, son of Antenor, who, though he was
a bastard, had been brought up by Theano as one of her own children,
for the love she bore her husband. The son of Phyleus got close up
to him and drove a spear into the nape of his neck: it went under
his tongue all among his teeth, so he bit the cold bronze, and fell
dead in the dust. 

And Eurypylus, son of Euaemon, killed Hypsenor, the son of noble Dolopion,
who had been made priest of the river Scamander, and was honoured
among the people as though he were a god. Eurypylus gave him chase
as he was flying before him, smote him with his sword upon the arm,
and lopped his strong hand from off it. The bloody hand fell to the
ground, and the shades of death, with fate that no man can withstand,
came over his eyes. 

Thus furiously did the battle rage between them. As for the son of
Tydeus, you could not say whether he was more among the Achaeans or
the Trojans. He rushed across the plain like a winter torrent that
has burst its barrier in full flood; no dykes, no walls of fruitful
vineyards can embank it when it is swollen with rain from heaven,
but in a moment it comes tearing onward, and lays many a field waste
that many a strong man hand has reclaimed- even so were the dense
phalanxes of the Trojans driven in rout by the son of Tydeus, and
many though they were, they dared not abide his onslaught.

Now when the son of Lycaon saw him scouring the plain and driving
the Trojans pell-mell before him, he aimed an arrow and hit the front
part of his cuirass near the shoulder: the arrow went right through
the metal and pierced the flesh, so that the cuirass was covered with
blood. On this the son of Lycaon shouted in triumph, "Knights Trojans,
come on; the bravest of the Achaeans is wounded, and he will not hold
out much longer if King Apollo was indeed with me when I sped from
Lycia hither." 

Thus did he vaunt; but his arrow had not killed Diomed, who withdrew
and made for the chariot and horses of Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus.
"Dear son of Capaneus," said he, "come down from your chariot, and
draw the arrow out of my shoulder." 

Sthenelus sprang from his chariot, and drew the arrow from the wound,
whereon the blood came spouting out through the hole that had been
made in his shirt. Then Diomed prayed, saying, "Hear me, daughter
of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, if ever you loved my father well
and stood by him in the thick of a fight, do the like now by me; grant
me to come within a spear's throw of that man and kill him. He has
been too quick for me and has wounded me; and now he is boasting that
I shall not see the light of the sun much longer." 

Thus he prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard him; she made his limbs supple
and quickened his hands and his feet. Then she went up close to him
and said, "Fear not, Diomed, to do battle with the Trojans, for I
have set in your heart the spirit of your knightly father Tydeus.
Moreover, I have withdrawn the veil from your eyes, that you know
gods and men apart. If, then, any other god comes here and offers
you battle, do not fight him; but should Jove's daughter Venus come,
strike her with your spear and wound her." 

When she had said this Minerva went away, and the son of Tydeus again
took his place among the foremost fighters, three times more fierce
even than he had been before. He was like a lion that some mountain
shepherd has wounded, but not killed, as he is springing over the
wall of a sheep-yard to attack the sheep. The shepherd has roused
the brute to fury but cannot defend his flock, so he takes shelter
under cover of the buildings, while the sheep, panic-stricken on being
deserted, are smothered in heaps one on top of the other, and the
angry lion leaps out over the sheep-yard wall. Even thus did Diomed
go furiously about among the Trojans. 

He killed Astynous, and shepherd of his people, the one with a thrust
of his spear, which struck him above the nipple, the other with a
sword- cut on the collar-bone, that severed his shoulder from his
neck and back. He let both of them lie, and went in pursuit of Abas
and Polyidus, sons of the old reader of dreams Eurydamas: they never
came back for him to read them any more dreams, for mighty Diomed
made an end of them. He then gave chase to Xanthus and Thoon, the
two sons of Phaenops, both of them very dear to him, for he was now
worn out with age, and begat no more sons to inherit his possessions.
But Diomed took both their lives and left their father sorrowing bitterly,
for he nevermore saw them come home from battle alive, and his kinsmen
divided his wealth among themselves. 

Then he came upon two sons of Priam, Echemmon and Chromius, as they
were both in one chariot. He sprang upon them as a lion fastens on
the neck of some cow or heifer when the herd is feeding in a coppice.
For all their vain struggles he flung them both from their chariot
and stripped the armour from their bodies. Then he gave their horses
to his comrades to take them back to the ships. 

When Aeneas saw him thus making havoc among the ranks, he went through
the fight amid the rain of spears to see if he could find Pandarus.
When he had found the brave son of Lycaon he said, "Pandarus, where
is now your bow, your winged arrows, and your renown as an archer,
in respect of which no man here can rival you nor is there any in
Lycia that can beat you? Lift then your hands to Jove and send an
arrow at this fellow who is going so masterfully about, and has done
such deadly work among the Trojans. He has killed many a brave man-
unless indeed he is some god who is angry with the Trojans about their
sacrifices, and and has set his hand against them in his displeasure."

And the son of Lycaon answered, "Aeneas, I take him for none other
than the son of Tydeus. I know him by his shield, the visor of his
helmet, and by his horses. It is possible that he may be a god, but
if he is the man I say he is, he is not making all this havoc without
heaven's help, but has some god by his side who is shrouded in a cloud
of darkness, and who turned my arrow aside when it had hit him. I
have taken aim at him already and hit him on the right shoulder; my
arrow went through the breastpiece of his cuirass; and I made sure
I should send him hurrying to the world below, but it seems that I
have not killed him. There must be a god who is angry with me. Moreover
I have neither horse nor chariot. In my father's stables there are
eleven excellent chariots, fresh from the builder, quite new, with
cloths spread over them; and by each of them there stand a pair of
horses, champing barley and rye; my old father Lycaon urged me again
and again when I was at home and on the point of starting, to take
chariots and horses with me that I might lead the Trojans in battle,
but I would not listen to him; it would have been much better if I
had done so, but I was thinking about the horses, which had been used
to eat their fill, and I was afraid that in such a great gathering
of men they might be ill-fed, so I left them at home and came on foot
to Ilius armed only with my bow and arrows. These it seems, are of
no use, for I have already hit two chieftains, the sons of Atreus
and of Tydeus, and though I drew blood surely enough, I have only
made them still more furious. I did ill to take my bow down from its
peg on the day I led my band of Trojans to Ilius in Hector's service,
and if ever I get home again to set eyes on my native place, my wife,
and the greatness of my house, may some one cut my head off then and
there if I do not break the bow and set it on a hot fire- such pranks
as it plays me." 

Aeneas answered, "Say no more. Things will not mend till we two go
against this man with chariot and horses and bring him to a trial
of arms. Mount my chariot, and note how cleverly the horses of Tros
can speed hither and thither over the plain in pursuit or flight.
If Jove again vouchsafes glory to the son of Tydeus they will carry
us safely back to the city. Take hold, then, of the whip and reins
while I stand upon the car to fight, or else do you wait this man's
onset while I look after the horses." 

"Aeneas." replied the son of Lycaon, "take the reins and drive; if
we have to fly before the son of Tydeus the horses will go better
for their own driver. If they miss the sound of your voice when they
expect it they may be frightened, and refuse to take us out of the
fight. The son of Tydeus will then kill both of us and take the horses.
Therefore drive them yourself and I will be ready for him with my
spear." 

They then mounted the chariot and drove full-speed towards the son
of Tydeus. Sthenelus, son of Capaneus, saw them coming and said to
Diomed, "Diomed, son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, I see two
heroes speeding towards you, both of them men of might the one a skilful
archer, Pandarus son of Lycaon, the other, Aeneas, whose sire is Anchises,
while his mother is Venus. Mount the chariot and let us retreat. Do
not, I pray you, press so furiously forward, or you may get killed."

Diomed looked angrily at him and answered: "Talk not of flight, for
I shall not listen to you: I am of a race that knows neither flight
nor fear, and my limbs are as yet unwearied. I am in no mind to mount,
but will go against them even as I am; Pallas Minerva bids me be afraid
of no man, and even though one of them escape, their steeds shall
not take both back again. I say further, and lay my saying to your
heart- if Minerva sees fit to vouchsafe me the glory of killing both,
stay your horses here and make the reins fast to the rim of the chariot;
then be sure you spring Aeneas' horses and drive them from the Trojan
to the Achaean ranks. They are of the stock that great Jove gave to
Tros in payment for his son Ganymede, and are the finest that live
and move under the sun. King Anchises stole the blood by putting his
mares to them without Laomedon's knowledge, and they bore him six
foals. Four are still in his stables, but he gave the other two to
Aeneas. We shall win great glory if we can take them." 

Thus did they converse, but the other two had now driven close up
to them, and the son of Lycaon spoke first. "Great and mighty son,"
said he, "of noble Tydeus, my arrow failed to lay you low, so I will
now try with my spear." 

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it from him. It struck
the shield of the son of Tydeus; the bronze point pierced it and passed
on till it reached the breastplate. Thereon the son of Lycaon shouted
out and said, "You are hit clean through the belly; you will not stand
out for long, and the glory of the fight is mine." 

But Diomed all undismayed made answer, "You have missed, not hit,
and before you two see the end of this matter one or other of you
shall glut tough-shielded Mars with his blood." 

With this he hurled his spear, and Minerva guided it on to Pandarus's
nose near the eye. It went crashing in among his white teeth; the
bronze point cut through the root of his to tongue, coming out under
his chin, and his glistening armour rang rattling round him as he
fell heavily to the ground. The horses started aside for fear, and
he was reft of life and strength. 

Aeneas sprang from his chariot armed with shield and spear, fearing
lest the Achaeans should carry off the body. He bestrode it as a lion
in the pride of strength, with shield and on spear before him and
a cry of battle on his lips resolute to kill the first that should
dare face him. But the son of Tydeus caught up a mighty stone, so
huge and great that as men now are it would take two to lift it; nevertheless
he bore it aloft with ease unaided, and with this he struck Aeneas
on the groin where the hip turns in the joint that is called the "cup-bone."
The stone crushed this joint, and broke both the sinews, while its
jagged edges tore away all the flesh. The hero fell on his knees,
and propped himself with his hand resting on the ground till the darkness
of night fell upon his eyes. And now Aeneas, king of men, would have
perished then and there, had not his mother, Jove's daughter Venus,
who had conceived him by Anchises when he was herding cattle, been
quick to mark, and thrown her two white arms about the body of her
dear son. She protected him by covering him with a fold of her own
fair garment, lest some Danaan should drive a spear into his breast
and kill him. 

Thus, then, did she bear her dear son out of the fight. But the son
of Capaneus was not unmindful of the orders that Diomed had given
him. He made his own horses fast, away from the hurly-burly, by binding
the reins to the rim of the chariot. Then he sprang upon Aeneas's
horses and drove them from the Trojan to the Achaean ranks. When he
had so done he gave them over to his chosen comrade Deipylus, whom
he valued above all others as the one who was most like-minded with
himself, to take them on to the ships. He then remounted his own chariot,
seized the reins, and drove with all speed in search of the son of
Tydeus. 

Now the son of Tydeus was in pursuit of the Cyprian goddess, spear
in hand, for he knew her to be feeble and not one of those goddesses
that can lord it among men in battle like Minerva or Enyo the waster
of cities, and when at last after a long chase he caught her up, he
flew at her and thrust his spear into the flesh of her delicate hand.
The point tore through the ambrosial robe which the Graces had woven
for her, and pierced the skin between her wrist and the palm of her
hand, so that the immortal blood, or ichor, that flows in the veins
of the blessed gods, came pouring from the wound; for the gods do
not eat bread nor drink wine, hence they have no blood such as ours,
and are immortal. Venus screamed aloud, and let her son fall, but
Phoebus Apollo caught him in his arms, and hid him in a cloud of darkness,
lest some Danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him;
and Diomed shouted out as he left her, "Daughter of Jove, leave war
and battle alone, can you not be contented with beguiling silly women?
If you meddle with fighting you will get what will make you shudder
at the very name of war." 

The goddess went dazed and discomfited away, and Iris, fleet as the
wind, drew her from the throng, in pain and with her fair skin all
besmirched. She found fierce Mars waiting on the left of the battle,
with his spear and his two fleet steeds resting on a cloud; whereon
she fell on her knees before her brother and implored him to let her
have his horses. "Dear brother," she cried, "save me, and give me
your horses to take me to Olympus where the gods dwell. I am badly
wounded by a mortal, the son of Tydeus, who would now fight even with
father Jove." 

Thus she spoke, and Mars gave her his gold-bedizened steeds. She mounted
the chariot sick and sorry at heart, while Iris sat beside her and
took the reins in her hand. She lashed her horses on and they flew
forward nothing loth, till in a trice they were at high Olympus, where
the gods have their dwelling. There she stayed them, unloosed them
from the chariot, and gave them their ambrosial forage; but Venus
flung herself on to the lap of her mother Dione, who threw her arms
about her and caressed her, saying, "Which of the heavenly beings
has been treating you in this way, as though you had been doing something
wrong in the face of day?" 

And laughter-loving Venus answered, "Proud Diomed, the son of Tydeus,
wounded me because I was bearing my dear son Aeneas, whom I love best
of all mankind, out of the fight. The war is no longer one between
Trojans and Achaeans, for the Danaans have now taken to fighting with
the immortals." 

"Bear it, my child," replied Dione, "and make the best of it. We dwellers
in Olympus have to put up with much at the hands of men, and we lay
much suffering on one another. Mars had to suffer when Otus and Ephialtes,
children of Aloeus, bound him in cruel bonds, so that he lay thirteen
months imprisoned in a vessel of bronze. Mars would have then perished
had not fair Eeriboea, stepmother to the sons of Aloeus, told Mercury,
who stole him away when he was already well-nigh worn out by the severity
of his bondage. Juno, again, suffered when the mighty son of Amphitryon
wounded her on the right breast with a three-barbed arrow, and nothing
could assuage her pain. So, also, did huge Hades, when this same man,
the son of aegis-bearing Jove, hit him with an arrow even at the gates
of hell, and hurt him badly. Thereon Hades went to the house of Jove
on great Olympus, angry and full of pain; and the arrow in his brawny
shoulder caused him great anguish till Paeeon healed him by spreading
soothing herbs on the wound, for Hades was not of mortal mould. Daring,
head-strong, evildoer who recked not of his sin in shooting the gods
that dwell in Olympus. And now Minerva has egged this son of Tydeus
on against yourself, fool that he is for not reflecting that no man
who fights with gods will live long or hear his children prattling
about his knees when he returns from battle. Let, then, the son of
Tydeus see that he does not have to fight with one who is stronger
than you are. Then shall his brave wife Aegialeia, daughter of Adrestus,
rouse her whole house from sleep, wailing for the loss of her wedded
lord, Diomed the bravest of the Achaeans." 

So saying, she wiped the ichor from the wrist of her daughter with
both hands, whereon the pain left her, and her hand was healed. But
Minerva and Juno, who were looking on, began to taunt Jove with their
mocking talk, and Minerva was first to speak. "Father Jove," said
she, "do not be angry with me, but I think the Cyprian must have been
persuading some one of the Achaean women to go with the Trojans of
whom she is so very fond, and while caressing one or other of them
she must have torn her delicate hand with the gold pin of the woman's
brooch." 

The sire of gods and men smiled, and called golden Venus to his side.
"My child," said he, "it has not been given you to be a warrior. Attend,
henceforth, to your own delightful matrimonial duties, and leave all
this fighting to Mars and to Minerva." 

Thus did they converse. But Diomed sprang upon Aeneas, though he knew
him to be in the very arms of Apollo. Not one whit did he fear the
mighty god, so set was he on killing Aeneas and stripping him of his
armour. Thrice did he spring forward with might and main to slay him,
and thrice did Apollo beat back his gleaming shield. When he was coming
on for the fourth time, as though he were a god, Apollo shouted to
him with an awful voice and said, "Take heed, son of Tydeus, and draw
off; think not to match yourself against gods, for men that walk the
earth cannot hold their own with the immortals." 

The son of Tydeus then gave way for a little space, to avoid the anger
of the god, while Apollo took Aeneas out of the crowd and set him
in sacred Pergamus, where his temple stood. There, within the mighty
sanctuary, Latona and Diana healed him and made him glorious to behold,
while Apollo of the silver bow fashioned a wraith in the likeness
of Aeneas, and armed as he was. Round this the Trojans and Achaeans
hacked at the bucklers about one another's breasts, hewing each other's
round shields and light hide-covered targets. Then Phoebus Apollo
said to Mars, "Mars, Mars, bane of men, blood-stained stormer of cities,
can you not go to this man, the son of Tydeus, who would now fight
even with father Jove, and draw him out of the battle? He first went
up to the Cyprian and wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and
afterwards sprang upon me too, as though he were a god."

He then took his seat on the top of Pergamus, while murderous Mars
went about among the ranks of the Trojans, cheering them on, in the
likeness of fleet Acamas chief of the Thracians. "Sons of Priam,"
said he, "how long will you let your people be thus slaughtered by
the Achaeans? Would you wait till they are at the walls of Troy? Aeneas
the son of Anchises has fallen, he whom we held in as high honour
as Hector himself. Help me, then, to rescue our brave comrade from
the stress of the fight." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Then Sarpedon
rebuked Hector very sternly. "Hector," said he, "where is your prowess
now? You used to say that though you had neither people nor allies
you could hold the town alone with your brothers and brothers-in-law.
I see not one of them here; they cower as hounds before a lion; it
is we, your allies, who bear the brunt of the battle. I have come
from afar, even from Lycia and the banks of the river Xanthus, where
I have left my wife, my infant son, and much wealth to tempt whoever
is needy; nevertheless, I head my Lycian soldiers and stand my ground
against any who would fight me though I have nothing here for the
Achaeans to plunder, while you look on, without even bidding your
men stand firm in defence of their wives. See that you fall not into
the hands of your foes as men caught in the meshes of a net, and they
sack your fair city forthwith. Keep this before your mind night and
day, and beseech the captains of your allies to hold on without flinching,
and thus put away their reproaches from you." 

So spoke Sarpedon, and Hector smarted under his words. He sprang from
his chariot clad in his suit of armour, and went about among the host
brandishing his two spears, exhorting the men to fight and raising
the terrible cry of battle. Then they rallied and again faced the
Achaeans, but the Argives stood compact and firm, and were not driven
back. As the breezes sport with the chaff upon some goodly threshing-floor,
when men are winnowing- while yellow Ceres blows with the wind to
sift the chaff from the grain, and the chaff- heaps grow whiter and
whiter- even so did the Achaeans whiten in the dust which the horses'
hoofs raised to the firmament of heaven, as their drivers turned them
back to battle, and they bore down with might upon the foe. Fierce
Mars, to help the Trojans, covered them in a veil of darkness, and
went about everywhere among them, inasmuch as Phoebus Apollo had told
him that when he saw Pallas, Minerva leave the fray he was to put
courage into the hearts of the Trojans- for it was she who was helping
the Danaans. Then Apollo sent Aeneas forth from his rich sanctuary,
and filled his heart with valour, whereon he took his place among
his comrades, who were overjoyed at seeing him alive, sound, and of
a good courage; but they could not ask him how it had all happened,
for they were too busy with the turmoil raised by Mars and by Strife,
who raged insatiably in their midst. 

The two Ajaxes, Ulysses and Diomed, cheered the Danaans on, fearless
of the fury and onset of the Trojans. They stood as still as clouds
which the son of Saturn has spread upon the mountain tops when there
is no air and fierce Boreas sleeps with the other boisterous winds
whose shrill blasts scatter the clouds in all directions- even so
did the Danaans stand firm and unflinching against the Trojans. The
son of Atreus went about among them and exhorted them. "My friends,"
said he, "quit yourselves like brave men, and shun dishonour in one
another's eyes amid the stress of battle. They that shun dishonour
more often live than get killed, but they that fly save neither life
nor name." 

As he spoke he hurled his spear and hit one of those who were in the
front rank, the comrade of Aeneas, Deicoon son of Pergasus, whom the
Trojans held in no less honour than the sons of Priam, for he was
ever quick to place himself among the foremost. The spear of King
Agamemnon struck his shield and went right through it, for the shield
stayed it not. It drove through his belt into the lower part of his
belly, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to
the ground. 

Then Aeneas killed two champions of the Danaans, Crethon and Orsilochus.
Their father was a rich man who lived in the strong city of Phere
and was descended from the river Alpheus, whose broad stream flows
through the land of the Pylians. The river begat Orsilochus, who ruled
over much people and was father to Diocles, who in his turn begat
twin sons, Crethon and Orsilochus, well skilled in all the arts of
war. These, when they grew up, went to Ilius with the Argive fleet
in the cause of Menelaus and Agamemnon sons of Atreus, and there they
both of them fell. As two lions whom their dam has reared in the depths
of some mountain forest to plunder homesteads and carry off sheep
and cattle till they get killed by the hand of man, so were these
two vanquished by Aeneas, and fell like high pine-trees to the ground.

Brave Menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the
front, clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for Mars
egged him on to do so with intent that he should be killed by Aeneas;
but Antilochus the son of Nestor saw him and sprang forward, fearing
that the king might come to harm and thus bring all their labour to
nothing; when, therefore Aeneas and Menelaus were setting their hands
and spears against one another eager to do battle, Antilochus placed
himself by the side of Menelaus. Aeneas, bold though he was, drew
back on seeing the two heroes side by side in front of him, so they
drew the bodies of Crethon and Orsilochus to the ranks of the Achaeans
and committed the two poor fellows into the hands of their comrades.
They then turned back and fought in the front ranks. 

They killed Pylaemenes peer of Mars, leader of the Paphlagonian warriors.
Menelaus struck him on the collar-bone as he was standing on his chariot,
while Antilochus hit his charioteer and squire Mydon, the son of Atymnius,
who was turning his horses in flight. He hit him with a stone upon
the elbow, and the reins, enriched with white ivory, fell from his
hands into the dust. Antilochus rushed towards him and struck him
on the temples with his sword, whereon he fell head first from the
chariot to the ground. There he stood for a while with his head and
shoulders buried deep in the dust- for he had fallen on sandy soil
till his horses kicked him and laid him flat on the ground, as Antilochus
lashed them and drove them off to the host of the Achaeans.

But Hector marked them from across the ranks, and with a loud cry
rushed towards them, followed by the strong battalions of the Trojans.
Mars and dread Enyo led them on, she fraught with ruthless turmoil
of battle, while Mars wielded a monstrous spear, and went about, now
in front of Hector and now behind him. 

Diomed shook with passion as he saw them. As a man crossing a wide
plain is dismayed to find himself on the brink of some great river
rolling swiftly to the sea- he sees its boiling waters and starts
back in fear- even so did the son of Tydeus give ground. Then he said
to his men, "My friends, how can we wonder that Hector wields the
spear so well? Some god is ever by his side to protect him, and now
Mars is with him in the likeness of mortal man. Keep your faces therefore
towards the Trojans, but give ground backwards, for we dare not fight
with gods." 

As he spoke the Trojans drew close up, and Hector killed two men,
both in one chariot, Menesthes and Anchialus, heroes well versed in
war. Ajax son of Telamon pitied them in their fall; he came close
up and hurled his spear, hitting Amphius the son of Selagus, a man
of great wealth who lived in Paesus and owned much corn-growing land,
but his lot had led him to come to the aid of Priam and his sons.
Ajax struck him in the belt; the spear pierced the lower part of his
belly, and he fell heavily to the ground. Then Ajax ran towards him
to strip him of his armour, but the Trojans rained spears upon him,
many of which fell upon his shield. He planted his heel upon the body
and drew out his spear, but the darts pressed so heavily upon him
that he could not strip the goodly armour from his shoulders. The
Trojan chieftains, moreover, many and valiant, came about him with
their spears, so that he dared not stay; great, brave and valiant
though he was, they drove him from them and he was beaten back.

Thus, then, did the battle rage between them. Presently the strong
hand of fate impelled Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules, a man both
brave and of great stature, to fight Sarpedon; so the two, son and
grandson of great Jove, drew near to one another, and Tlepolemus spoke
first. "Sarpedon," said he, "councillor of the Lycians, why should
you come skulking here you who are a man of peace? They lie who call
you son of aegis-bearing Jove, for you are little like those who were
of old his children. Far other was Hercules, my own brave and lion-hearted
father, who came here for the horses of Laomedon, and though he had
six ships only, and few men to follow him, sacked the city of Ilius
and made a wilderness of her highways. You are a coward, and your
people are falling from you. For all your strength, and all your coming
from Lycia, you will be no help to the Trojans but will pass the gates
of Hades vanquished by my hand." 

And Sarpedon, captain of the Lycians, answered, "Tlepolemus, your
father overthrew Ilius by reason of Laomedon's folly in refusing payment
to one who had served him well. He would not give your father the
horses which he had come so far to fetch. As for yourself, you shall
meet death by my spear. You shall yield glory to myself, and your
soul to Hades of the noble steeds." 

Thus spoke Sarpedon, and Tlepolemus upraised his spear. They threw
at the same moment, and Sarpedon struck his foe in the middle of his
throat; the spear went right through, and the darkness of death fell
upon his eyes. Tlepolemus's spear struck Sarpedon on the left thigh
with such force that it tore through the flesh and grazed the bone,
but his father as yet warded off destruction from him. 

His comrades bore Sarpedon out of the fight, in great pain by the
weight of the spear that was dragging from his wound. They were in
such haste and stress as they bore him that no one thought of drawing
the spear from his thigh so as to let him walk uprightly. Meanwhile
the Achaeans carried off the body of Tlepolemus, whereon Ulysses was
moved to pity, and panted for the fray as he beheld them. He doubted
whether to pursue the son of Jove, or to make slaughter of the Lycian
rank and file; it was not decreed, however, that he should slay the
son of Jove; Minerva, therefore, turned him against the main body
of the Lycians. He killed Coeranus, Alastor, Chromius, Alcandrus,
Halius, Noemon, and Prytanis, and would have slain yet more, had not
great Hector marked him, and sped to the front of the fight clad in
his suit of mail, filling the Danaans with terror. Sarpedon was glad
when he saw him coming, and besought him, saying, "Son of Priam, let
me not he here to fall into the hands of the Danaans. Help me, and
since I may not return home to gladden the hearts of my wife and of
my infant son, let me die within the walls of your city."

Hector made him no answer, but rushed onward to fall at once upon
the Achaeans and. kill many among them. His comrades then bore Sarpedon
away and laid him beneath Jove's spreading oak tree. Pelagon, his
friend and comrade drew the spear out of his thigh, but Sarpedon fainted
and a mist came over his eyes. Presently he came to himself again,
for the breath of the north wind as it played upon him gave him new
life, and brought him out of the deep swoon into which he had fallen.

Meanwhile the Argives were neither driven towards their ships by Mars
and Hector, nor yet did they attack them; when they knew that Mars
was with the Trojans they retreated, but kept their faces still turned
towards the foe. Who, then, was first and who last to be slain by
Mars and Hector? They were valiant Teuthras, and Orestes the renowned
charioteer, Trechus the Aetolian warrior, Oenomaus, Helenus the son
of Oenops, and Oresbius of the gleaming girdle, who was possessed
of great wealth, and dwelt by the Cephisian lake with the other Boeotians
who lived near him, owners of a fertile country. 

Now when the goddess Juno saw the Argives thus falling, she said to
Minerva, "Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, the promise
we made Menelaus that he should not return till he had sacked the
city of Ilius will be of none effect if we let Mars rage thus furiously.
Let us go into the fray at once." 

Minerva did not gainsay her. Thereon the august goddess, daughter
of great Saturn, began to harness her gold-bedizened steeds. Hebe
with all speed fitted on the eight-spoked wheels of bronze that were
on either side of the iron axle-tree. The felloes of the wheels were
of gold, imperishable, and over these there was a tire of bronze,
wondrous to behold. The naves of the wheels were silver, turning round
the axle upon either side. The car itself was made with plaited bands
of gold and silver, and it had a double top-rail running all round
it. From the body of the car there went a pole of silver, on to the
end of which she bound the golden yoke, with the bands of gold that
were to go under the necks of the horses Then Juno put her steeds
under the yoke, eager for battle and the war-cry. 

Meanwhile Minerva flung her richly embroidered vesture, made with
her own hands, on to her father's threshold, and donned the shirt
of Jove, arming herself for battle. She threw her tasselled aegis
about. her shoulders, wreathed round with Rout as with a fringe, and
on it were Strife, and Strength, and Panic whose blood runs cold;
moreover there was the head of the dread monster Gorgon,, grim and
awful to behold, portent of aegis-bearing Jove. On her head she set
her helmet of gold, with four plumes, and coming to a peak both in
front and behind- decked with the emblems of a hundred cities; then
she stepped into her flaming chariot and grasped the spear, so stout
and sturdy and strong, with which she quells the ranks of heroes who
have displeased her. Juno lashed the horses on, and the gates of heaven
bellowed as they flew open of their own accord -gates over which the
flours preside, in whose hands are Heaven and Olympus, either to open
the dense cloud that hides them, or to close it. Through these the
goddesses drove their obedient steeds, and found the son of Saturn
sitting all alone on the topmost ridges of Olympus. There Juno stayed
her horses, and spoke to Jove the son of Saturn, lord of all. "Father
Jove," said she, "are you not angry with Mars for these high doings?
how great and goodly a host of the Achaeans he has destroyed to my
great grief, and without either right or reason, while the Cyprian
and Apollo are enjoying it all at their ease and setting this unrighteous
madman on to do further mischief. I hope, Father Jove, that you will
not be angry if I hit Mars hard, and chase him out of the battle."

And Jove answered, "Set Minerva on to him, for she punishes him more
often than any one else does." 

Juno did as he had said. She lashed her horses, and they flew forward
nothing loth midway betwixt earth and sky. As far as a man can see
when he looks out upon the sea from some high beacon, so far can the
loud-neighing horses of the gods spring at a single bound. When they
reached Troy and the place where its two flowing streams Simois and
Scamander meet, there Juno stayed them and took them from the chariot.
She hid them in a thick cloud, and Simois made ambrosia spring up
for them to eat; the two goddesses then went on, flying like turtledoves
in their eagerness to help the Argives. When they came to the part
where the bravest and most in number were gathered about mighty Diomed,
fighting like lions or wild boars of great strength and endurance,
there Juno stood still and raised a shout like that of brazen-voiced
Stentor, whose cry was as loud as that of fifty men together. "Argives,"
she cried; "shame on cowardly creatures, brave in semblance only;
as long as Achilles was fighting, fi his spear was so deadly that
the Trojans dared not show themselves outside the Dardanian gates,
but now they sally far from the city and fight even at your ships."

With these words she put heart and soul into them all, while Minerva
sprang to the side of the son of Tydeus, whom she found near his chariot
and horses, cooling the wound that Pandarus had given him. For the
sweat caused by the hand that bore the weight of his shield irritated
the hurt: his arm was weary with pain, and he was lifting up the strap
to wipe away the blood. The goddess laid her hand on the yoke of his
horses and said, "The son of Tydeus is not such another as his father.
Tydeus was a little man, but he could fight, and rushed madly into
the fray even when I told him not to do so. When he went all unattended
as envoy to the city of Thebes among the Cadmeans, I bade him feast
in their houses and be at peace; but with that high spirit which was
ever present with him, he challenged the youth of the Cadmeans, and
at once beat them in all that he attempted, so mightily did I help
him. I stand by you too to protect you, and I bid you be instant in
fighting the Trojans; but either you are tired out, or you are afraid
and out of heart, and in that case I say that you are no true son
of Tydeus the son of Oeneus." 

Diomed answered, "I know you, goddess, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove,
and will hide nothing from you. I am not afraid nor out of heart,
nor is there any slackness in me. I am only following your own instructions;
you told me not to fight any of the blessed gods; but if Jove's daughter
Venus came into battle I was to wound her with my spear. Therefore
I am retreating, and bidding the other Argives gather in this place,
for I know that Mars is now lording it in the field." 

"Diomed, son of Tydeus," replied Minerva, "man after my own heart,
fear neither Mars nor any other of the immortals, for I will befriend
you. Nay, drive straight at Mars, and smite him in close combat; fear
not this raging madman, villain incarnate, first on one side and then
on the other. But now he was holding talk with Juno and myself, saying
he would help the Argives and attack the Trojans; nevertheless he
is with the Trojans, and has forgotten the Argives." 

With this she caught hold of Sthenelus and lifted him off the chariot
on to the ground. In a second he was on the ground, whereupon the
goddess mounted the car and placed herself by the side of Diomed.
The oaken axle groaned aloud under the burden of the awful goddess
and the hero; Pallas Minerva took the whip and reins, and drove straight
at Mars. He was in the act of stripping huge Periphas, son of Ochesius
and bravest of the Aetolians. Bloody Mars was stripping him of his
armour, and Minerva donned the helmet of Hades, that he might not
see her; when, therefore, he saw Diomed, he made straight for him
and let Periphas lie where he had fallen. As soon as they were at
close quarters he let fly with his bronze spear over the reins and
yoke, thinking to take Diomed's life, but Minerva caught the spear
in her hand and made it fly harmlessly over the chariot. Diomed then
threw, and Pallas Minerva drove the spear into the pit of Mars's stomach
where his under-girdle went round him. There Diomed wounded him, tearing
his fair flesh and then drawing his spear out again. Mars roared as
loudly as nine or ten thousand men in the thick of a fight, and the
Achaeans and Trojans were struck with panic, so terrible was the cry
he raised. 

As a dark cloud in the sky when it comes on to blow after heat, even
so did Diomed son of Tydeus see Mars ascend into the broad heavens.
With all speed he reached high Olympus, home of the gods, and in great
pain sat down beside Jove the son of Saturn. He showed Jove the immortal
blood that was flowing from his wound, and spoke piteously, saying,
"Father Jove, are you not angered by such doings? We gods are continually
suffering in the most cruel manner at one another's hands while helping
mortals; and we all owe you a grudge for having begotten that mad
termagant of a daughter, who is always committing outrage of some
kind. We other gods must all do as you bid us, but her you neither
scold nor punish; you encourage her because the pestilent creature
is your daughter. See how she has been inciting proud Diomed to vent
his rage on the immortal gods. First he went up to the Cyprian and
wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and then he sprang upon me
too as though he were a god. Had I not run for it I must either have
lain there for long enough in torments among the ghastly corpes, or
have been eaten alive with spears till I had no more strength left
in me." 

Jove looked angrily at him and said, "Do not come whining here, Sir
Facing-bothways. I hate you worst of all the gods in Olympus, for
you are ever fighting and making mischief. You have the intolerable
and stubborn spirit of your mother Juno: it is all I can do to manage
her, and it is her doing that you are now in this plight: still, I
cannot let you remain longer in such great pain; you are my own off-spring,
and it was by me that your mother conceived you; if, however, you
had been the son of any other god, you are so destructive that by
this time you should have been lying lower than the Titans."

He then bade Paeeon heal him, whereon Paeeon spread pain-killing herbs
upon his wound and cured him, for he was not of mortal mould. As the
juice of the fig-tree curdles milk, and thickens it in a moment though
it is liquid, even so instantly did Paeeon cure fierce Mars. Then
Hebe washed him, and clothed him in goodly raiment, and he took his
seat by his father Jove all glorious to behold. 

But Juno of Argos and Minerva of Alalcomene, now that they had put
a stop to the murderous doings of Mars, went back again to the house
of Jove. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VI

The fight between Trojans and Achaeans was now left to rage as it
would, and the tide of war surged hither and thither over the plain
as they aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another between the
streams of Simois and Xanthus. 

First, Ajax son of Telamon, tower of strength to the Achaeans, broke
a phalanx of the Trojans, and came to the assistance of his comrades
by killing Acamas son of Eussorus, the best man among the Thracians,
being both brave and of great stature. The spear struck the projecting
peak of his helmet: its bronze point then went through his forehead
into the brain, and darkness veiled his eyes. 

Then Diomed killed Axylus son of Teuthranus, a rich man who lived
in the strong city of Arisbe, and was beloved by all men; for he had
a house by the roadside, and entertained every one who passed; howbeit
not one of his guests stood before him to save his life, and Diomed
killed both him and his squire Calesius, who was then his charioteer-
so the pair passed beneath the earth. 

Euryalus killed Dresus and Opheltius, and then went in pursuit of
Aesepus and Pedasus, whom the naiad nymph Abarbarea had borne to noble
Bucolion. Bucolion was eldest son to Laomedon, but he was a bastard.
While tending his sheep he had converse with the nymph, and she conceived
twin sons; these the son of Mecisteus now slew, and he stripped the
armour from their shoulders. Polypoetes then killed Astyalus, Ulysses
Pidytes of Percote, and Teucer Aretaon. Ablerus fell by the spear
of Nestor's son Antilochus, and Agamemnon, king of men, killed Elatus
who dwelt in Pedasus by the banks of the river Satnioeis. Leitus killed
Phylacus as he was flying, and Eurypylus slew Melanthus.

Then Menelaus of the loud war-cry took Adrestus alive, for his horses
ran into a tamarisk bush, as they were flying wildly over the plain,
and broke the pole from the car; they went on towards the city along
with the others in full flight, but Adrestus rolled out, and fell
in the dust flat on his face by the wheel of his chariot; Menelaus
came up to him spear in hand, but Adrestus caught him by the knees
begging for his life. "Take me alive," he cried, "son of Atreus, and
you shall have a full ransom for me: my father is rich and has much
treasure of gold, bronze, and wrought iron laid by in his house. From
this store he will give you a large ransom should he hear of my being
alive and at the ships of the Achaeans." 

Thus did he plead, and Menelaus was for yielding and giving him to
a squire to take to the ships of the Achaeans, but Agamemnon came
running up to him and rebuked him. "My good Menelaus," said he, "this
is no time for giving quarter. Has, then, your house fared so well
at the hands of the Trojans? Let us not spare a single one of them-
not even the child unborn and in its mother's womb; let not a man
of them be left alive, but let all in Ilius perish, unheeded and forgotten."

Thus did he speak, and his brother was persuaded by him, for his words
were just. Menelaus, therefore, thrust Adrestus from him, whereon
King Agamemnon struck him in the flank, and he fell: then the son
of Atreus planted his foot upon his breast to draw his spear from
the body. 

Meanwhile Nestor shouted to the Argives, saying, "My friends, Danaan
warriors, servants of Mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead,
and bring back much booty to the ships. Let us kill as many as we
can; the bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them
later at your leisure." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. And now the
Trojans would have been routed and driven back into Ilius, had not
Priam's son Helenus, wisest of augurs, said to Hector and Aeneas,
"Hector and Aeneas, you two are the mainstays of the Trojans and Lycians,
for you are foremost at all times, alike in fight and counsel; hold
your ground here, and go about among the host to rally them in front
of the gates, or they will fling themselves into the arms of their
wives, to the great joy of our foes. Then, when you have put heart
into all our companies, we will stand firm here and fight the Danaans
however hard they press us, for there is nothing else to be done.
Meanwhile do you, Hector, go to the city and tell our mother what
is happening. Tell her to bid the matrons gather at the temple of
Minerva in the acropolis; let her then take her key and open the doors
of the sacred building; there, upon the knees of Minerva, let her
lay the largest, fairest robe she has in her house- the one she sets
most store by; let her, moreover, promise to sacrifice twelve yearling
heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the temple of the goddess,
if she will take pity on the town, with the wives and little ones
of the Trojans, and keep the son of Tydeus from falling on the goodly
city of Ilius; for he fights with fury and fills men's souls with
panic. I hold him mightiest of them all; we did not fear even their
great champion Achilles, son of a goddess though he be, as we do this
man: his rage is beyond all bounds, and there is none can vie with
him in prowess" 

Hector did as his brother bade him. He sprang from his chariot, and
went about everywhere among the host, brandishing his spears, urging
the men on to fight, and raising the dread cry of battle. Thereon
they rallied and again faced the Achaeans, who gave ground and ceased
their murderous onset, for they deemed that some one of the immortals
had come down from starry heaven to help the Trojans, so strangely
had they rallied. And Hector shouted to the Trojans, "Trojans and
allies, be men, my friends, and fight with might and main, while I
go to Ilius and tell the old men of our council and our wives to pray
to the gods and vow hecatombs in their honour." 

With this he went his way, and the black rim of hide that went round
his shield beat against his neck and his ancles. 

Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus, and the son of Tydeus went into the
open space between the hosts to fight in single combat. When they
were close up to one another Diomed of the loud war-cry was the first
to speak. "Who, my good sir," said he, "who are you among men? I have
never seen you in battle until now, but you are daring beyond all
others if you abide my onset. Woe to those fathers whose sons face
my might. If, however, you are one of the immortals and have come
down from heaven, I will not fight you; for even valiant Lycurgus,
son of Dryas, did not live long when he took to fighting with the
gods. He it was that drove the nursing women who were in charge of
frenzied Bacchus through the land of Nysa, and they flung their thyrsi
on the ground as murderous Lycurgus beat them with his oxgoad. Bacchus
himself plunged terror-stricken into the sea, and Thetis took him
to her bosom to comfort him, for he was scared by the fury with which
the man reviled him. Thereon the gods who live at ease were angry
with Lycurgus and the son of Saturn struck him blind, nor did he live
much longer after he had become hateful to the immortals. Therefore
I will not fight with the blessed gods; but if you are of them that
eat the fruit of the ground, draw near and meet your doom."

And the son of Hippolochus answered, son of Tydeus, why ask me of
my lineage? Men come and go as leaves year by year upon the trees.
Those of autumn the wind sheds upon the ground, but when spring returns
the forest buds forth with fresh vines. Even so is it with the generations
of mankind, the new spring up as the old are passing away. If, then,
you would learn my descent, it is one that is well known to many.
There is a city in the heart of Argos, pasture land of horses, called
Ephyra, where Sisyphus lived, who was the craftiest of all mankind.
He was the son of Aeolus, and had a son named Glaucus, who was father
to Bellerophon, whom heaven endowed with the most surpassing comeliness
and beauty. But Proetus devised his ruin, and being stronger than
he, drove him from the land of the Argives, over which Jove had made
him ruler. For Antea, wife of Proetus, lusted after him, and would
have had him lie with her in secret; but Bellerophon was an honourable
man and would not, so she told lies about him to Proteus. 'Proetus,'
said she, 'kill Bellerophon or die, for he would have had converse
with me against my will.' The king was angered, but shrank from killing
Bellerophon, so he sent him to Lycia with lying letters of introduction,
written on a folded tablet, and containing much ill against the bearer.
He bade Bellerophon show these letters to his father-in-law, to the
end that he might thus perish; Bellerophon therefore went to Lycia,
and the gods convoyed him safely. 

"When he reached the river Xanthus, which is in Lycia, the king received
him with all goodwill, feasted him nine days, and killed nine heifers
in his honour, but when rosy-fingered morning appeared upon the tenth
day, he questioned him and desired to see the letter from his son-in-law
Proetus. When he had received the wicked letter he first commanded
Bellerophon to kill that savage monster, the Chimaera, who was not
a human being, but a goddess, for she had the head of a lion and the
tail of a serpent, while her body was that of a goat, and she breathed
forth flames of fire; but Bellerophon slew her, for he was guided
by signs from heaven. He next fought the far-famed Solymi, and this,
he said, was the hardest of all his battles. Thirdly, he killed the
Amazons, women who were the peers of men, and as he was returning
thence the king devised yet another plan for his destruction; he picked
the bravest warriors in all Lycia, and placed them in ambuscade, but
not a man ever came back, for Bellerophon killed every one of them.
Then the king knew that he must be the valiant offspring of a god,
so he kept him in Lycia, gave him his daughter in marriage, and made
him of equal honour in the kingdom with himself; and the Lycians gave
him a piece of land, the best in all the country, fair with vineyards
and tilled fields, to have and to hold. 

"The king's daughter bore Bellerophon three children, Isander, Hippolochus,
and Laodameia. Jove, the lord of counsel, lay with Laodameia, and
she bore him noble Sarpedon; but when Bellerophon came to be hated
by all the gods, he wandered all desolate and dismayed upon the Alean
plain, gnawing at his own heart, and shunning the path of man. Mars,
insatiate of battle, killed his son Isander while he was fighting
the Solymi; his daughter was killed by Diana of the golden reins,
for she was angered with her; but Hippolochus was father to myself,
and when he sent me to Troy he urged me again and again to fight ever
among the foremost and outvie my peers, so as not to shame the blood
of my fathers who were the noblest in Ephyra and in all Lycia. This,
then, is the descent I claim." 

Thus did he speak, and the heart of Diomed was glad. He planted his
spear in the ground, and spoke to him with friendly words. "Then,"
he said, you are an old friend of my father's house. Great Oeneus
once entertained Bellerophon for twenty days, and the two exchanged
presents. Oeneus gave a belt rich with purple, and Bellerophon a double
cup, which I left at home when I set out for Troy. I do not remember
Tydeus, for he was taken from us while I was yet a child, when the
army of the Achaeans was cut to pieces before Thebes. Henceforth,
however, I must be your host in middle Argos, and you mine in Lycia,
if I should ever go there; let us avoid one another's spears even
during a general engagement; there are many noble Trojans and allies
whom I can kill, if I overtake them and heaven delivers them into
my hand; so again with yourself, there are many Achaeans whose lives
you may take if you can; we two, then, will exchange armour, that
all present may know of the old ties that subsist between us."

With these words they sprang from their chariots, grasped one another's
hands, and plighted friendship. But the son of Saturn made Glaucus
take leave of his wits, for he exchanged golden armour for bronze,
the worth of a hundred head of cattle for the worth of nine.

Now when Hector reached the Scaean gates and the oak tree, the wives
and daughters of the Trojans came running towards him to ask after
their sons, brothers, kinsmen, and husbands: he told them to set about
praying to the gods, and many were made sorrowful as they heard him.

Presently he reached the splendid palace of King Priam, adorned with
colonnades of hewn stone. In it there were fifty bedchambers- all
of hewn stone- built near one another, where the sons of Priam slept,
each with his wedded wife. Opposite these, on the other side the courtyard,
there were twelve upper rooms also of hewn stone for Priam's daughters,
built near one another, where his sons-in-law slept with their wives.
When Hector got there, his fond mother came up to him with Laodice
the fairest of her daughters. She took his hand within her own and
said, "My son, why have you left the battle to come hither? Are the
Achaeans, woe betide them, pressing you hard about the city that you
have thought fit to come and uplift your hands to Jove from the citadel?
Wait till I can bring you wine that you may make offering to Jove
and to the other immortals, and may then drink and be refreshed. Wine
gives a man fresh strength when he is wearied, as you now are with
fighting on behalf of your kinsmen." 

And Hector answered, "Honoured mother, bring no wine, lest you unman
me and I forget my strength. I dare not make a drink-offering to Jove
with unwashed hands; one who is bespattered with blood and filth may
not pray to the son of Saturn. Get the matrons together, and go with
offerings to the temple of Minerva driver of the spoil; there, upon
the knees of Minerva, lay the largest and fairest robe you have in
your house- the one you set most store by; promise, moreover, to sacrifice
twelve yearling heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the
temple of the goddess if she will take pity on the town, with the
wives and little ones of the Trojans, and keep the son of Tydeus from
off the goodly city of Ilius, for he fights with fury, and fills men's
souls with panic. Go, then, to the temple of Minerva, while I seek
Paris and exhort him, if he will hear my words. Would that the earth
might open her jaws and swallow him, for Jove bred him to be the bane
of the Trojans, and of Priam and Priam's sons. Could I but see him
go down into the house of Hades, my heart would forget its heaviness."

His mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who gathered
the matrons throughout the city. She then went down into her fragrant
store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept, the work of Sidonian
women, whom Alexandrus had brought over from Sidon when he sailed
the seas upon that voyage during which he carried off Helen. Hecuba
took out the largest robe, and the one that was most beautifully enriched
with embroidery, as an offering to Minerva: it glittered like a star,
and lay at the very bottom of the chest. With this she went on her
way and many matrons with her. 

When they reached the temple of Minerva, lovely Theano, daughter of
Cisseus and wife of Antenor, opened the doors, for the Trojans had
made her priestess of Minerva. The women lifted up their hands to
the goddess with a loud cry, and Theano took the robe to lay it upon
the knees of Minerva, praying the while to the daughter of great Jove.
"Holy Minerva," she cried, "protectress of our city, mighty goddess,
break the spear of Diomed and lay him low before the Scaean gates.
Do this, and we will sacrifice twelve heifers that have never yet
known the goad, in your temple, if you will have pity upon the town,
with the wives and little ones If the Trojans." Thus she prayed, but
Pallas Minerva granted not her prayer. 

While they were thus praying to the daughter of great Jove, Hector
went to the fair house of Alexandrus, which he had built for him by
the foremost builders in the land. They had built him his house, storehouse,
and courtyard near those of Priam and Hector on the acropolis. Here
Hector entered, with a spear eleven cubits long in his hand; the bronze
point gleamed in front of him, and was fastened to the shaft of the
spear by a ring of gold. He found Alexandrus within the house, busied
about his armour, his shield and cuirass, and handling his curved
bow; there, too, sat Argive Helen with her women, setting them their
several tasks; and as Hector saw him he rebuked him with words of
scorn. "Sir," said he, "you do ill to nurse this rancour; the people
perish fighting round this our town; you would yourself chide one
whom you saw shirking his part in the combat. Up then, or ere long
the city will be in a blaze." 

And Alexandrus answered, "Hector, your rebuke is just; listen therefore,
and believe me when I tell you that I am not here so much through
rancour or ill-will towards the Trojans, as from a desire to indulge
my grief. My wife was even now gently urging me to battle, and I hold
it better that I should go, for victory is ever fickle. Wait, then,
while I put on my armour, or go first and I will follow. I shall be
sure to overtake you." 

Hector made no answer, but Helen tried to soothe him. "Brother," said
she, "to my abhorred and sinful self, would that a whirlwind had caught
me up on the day my mother brought me forth, and had borne me to some
mountain or to the waves of the roaring sea that should have swept
me away ere this mischief had come about. But, since the gods have
devised these evils, would, at any rate, that I had been wife to a
better man- to one who could smart under dishonour and men's evil
speeches. This fellow was never yet to be depended upon, nor never
will be, and he will surely reap what he has sown. Still, brother,
come in and rest upon this seat, for it is you who bear the brunt
of that toil that has been caused by my hateful self and by the sin
of Alexandrus- both of whom Jove has doomed to be a theme of song
among those that shall be born hereafter." 

And Hector answered, "Bid me not be seated, Helen, for all the goodwill
you bear me. I cannot stay. I am in haste to help the Trojans, who
miss me greatly when I am not among them; but urge your husband, and
of his own self also let him make haste to overtake me before I am
out of the city. I must go home to see my household, my wife and my
little son, for I know not whether I shall ever again return to them,
or whether the gods will cause me to fill by the hands of the Achaeans."

Then Hector left her, and forthwith was at his own house. He did not
find Andromache, for she was on the wall with her child and one of
her maids, weeping bitterly. Seeing, then, that she was not within,
he stood on the threshold of the women's rooms and said, "Women, tell
me, and tell me true, where did Andromache go when she left the house?
Was it to my sisters, or to my brothers' wives? or is she at the temple
of Minerva where the other women are propitiating the awful goddess?"

His good housekeeper answered, "Hector, since you bid me tell you
truly, she did not go to your sisters nor to your brothers' wives,
nor yet to the temple of Minerva, where the other women are propitiating
the awful goddess, but she is on the high wall of Ilius, for she had
heard the Trojans were being hard pressed, and that the Achaeans were
in great force: she went to the wall in frenzied haste, and the nurse
went with her carrying the child." 

Hector hurried from the house when she had done speaking, and went
down the streets by the same way that he had come. When he had gone
through the city and had reached the Scaean gates through which he
would go out on to the plain, his wife came running towards him, Andromache,
daughter of great Eetion who ruled in Thebe under the wooded slopes
of Mt. Placus, and was king of the Cilicians. His daughter had married
Hector, and now came to meet him with a nurse who carried his little
child in her bosom- a mere babe. Hector's darling son, and lovely
as a star. Hector had named him Scamandrius, but the people called
him Astyanax, for his father stood alone as chief guardian of Ilius.
Hector smiled as he looked upon the boy, but he did not speak, and
Andromache stood by him weeping and taking his hand in her own. "Dear
husband," said she, "your valour will bring you to destruction; think
on your infant son, and on my hapless self who ere long shall be your
widow- for the Achaeans will set upon you in a body and kill you.
It would be better for me, should I lose you, to lie dead and buried,
for I shall have nothing left to comfort me when you are gone, save
only sorrow. I have neither father nor mother now. Achilles slew my
father when he sacked Thebe the goodly city of the Cilicians. He slew
him, but did not for very shame despoil him; when he had burned him
in his wondrous armour, he raised a barrow over his ashes and the
mountain nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, planted a grove
of elms about his tomb. I had seven brothers in my father's house,
but on the same day they all went within the house of Hades. Achilles
killed them as they were with their sheep and cattle. My mother- her
who had been queen of all the land under Mt. Placus- he brought hither
with the spoil, and freed her for a great sum, but the archer- queen
Diana took her in the house of your father. Nay- Hector- you who to
me are father, mother, brother, and dear husband- have mercy upon
me; stay here upon this wall; make not your child fatherless, and
your wife a widow; as for the host, place them near the fig-tree,
where the city can be best scaled, and the wall is weakest. Thrice
have the bravest of them come thither and assailed it, under the two
Ajaxes, Idomeneus, the sons of Atreus, and the brave son of Tydeus,
either of their own bidding, or because some soothsayer had told them."

And Hector answered, "Wife, I too have thought upon all this, but
with what face should I look upon the Trojans, men or women, if I
shirked battle like a coward? I cannot do so: I know nothing save
to fight bravely in the forefront of the Trojan host and win renown
alike for my father and myself. Well do I know that the day will surely
come when mighty Ilius shall be destroyed with Priam and Priam's people,
but I grieve for none of these- not even for Hecuba, nor King Priam,
nor for my brothers many and brave who may fall in the dust before
their foes- for none of these do I grieve as for yourself when the
day shall come on which some one of the Achaeans shall rob you for
ever of your freedom, and bear you weeping away. It may be that you
will have to ply the loom in Argos at the bidding of a mistress, or
to fetch water from the springs Messeis or Hypereia, treated brutally
by some cruel task-master; then will one say who sees you weeping,
'She was wife to Hector, the bravest warrior among the Trojans during
the war before Ilius.' On this your tears will break forth anew for
him who would have put away the day of captivity from you. May I lie
dead under the barrow that is heaped over my body ere I hear your
cry as they carry you into bondage." 

He stretched his arms towards his child, but the boy cried and nestled
in his nurse's bosom, scared at the sight of his father's armour,
and at the horse-hair plume that nodded fiercely from his helmet.
His father and mother laughed to see him, but Hector took the helmet
from his head and laid it all gleaming upon the ground. Then he took
his darling child, kissed him, and dandled him in his arms, praying
over him the while to Jove and to all the gods. "Jove," he cried,
"grant that this my child may be even as myself, chief among the Trojans;
let him be not less excellent in strength, and let him rule Ilius
with his might. Then may one say of him as he comes from battle, 'The
son is far better than the father.' May he bring back the blood-stained
spoils of him whom he has laid low, and let his mother's heart be
glad.'" 

With this he laid the child again in the arms of his wife, who took
him to her own soft bosom, smiling through her tears. As her husband
watched her his heart yearned towards her and he caressed her fondly,
saying, "My own wife, do not take these things too bitterly to heart.
No one can hurry me down to Hades before my time, but if a man's hour
is come, be he brave or be he coward, there is no escape for him when
he has once been born. Go, then, within the house, and busy yourself
with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering
of your servants; for war is man's matter, and mine above all others
of them that have been born in Ilius." 

He took his plumed helmet from the ground, and his wife went back
again to her house, weeping bitterly and often looking back towards
him. When she reached her home she found her maidens within, and bade
them all join in her lament; so they mourned Hector in his own house
though he was yet alive, for they deemed that they should never see
him return safe from battle, and from the furious hands of the Achaeans.

Paris did not remain long in his house. He donned his goodly armour
overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast as his feet
could take him. As a horse, stabled and fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to bathe in
the fair-flowing river- he holds his head high, and his mane streams
upon his shoulders as he exults in his strength and flies like the
wind to the haunts and feeding ground of the mares- even so went forth
Paris from high Pergamus, gleaming like sunlight in his armour, and
he laughed aloud as he sped swiftly on his way. Forthwith he came
upon his brother Hector, who was then turning away from the place
where he had held converse with his wife, and he was himself the first
to speak. "Sir," said he, "I fear that I have kept you waiting when
you are in haste, and have not come as quickly as you bade me."

"My good brother," answered Hector, you fight bravely, and no man
with any justice can make light of your doings in battle. But you
are careless and wilfully remiss. It grieves me to the heart to hear
the ill that the Trojans speak about you, for they have suffered much
on your account. Let us be going, and we will make things right hereafter,
should Jove vouchsafe us to set the cup of our deliverance before
ever-living gods of heaven in our own homes, when we have chased the
Achaeans from Troy." 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VII

With these words Hector passed through the gates, and his brother
Alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. As when heaven sends
a breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have
laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome
was the sight of these two heroes to the Trojans. 

Thereon Alexandrus killed Menesthius the son of Areithous; he lived
in Ame, and was son of Areithous the Mace-man, and of Phylomedusa.
Hector threw a spear at Eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in
the neck under the bronze rim of his helmet. Glaucus, moreover, son
of Hippolochus, captain of the Lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight
smote Iphinous son of Dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing
on to his chariot behind his fleet mares; so he fell to earth from
the car, and there was no life left in him. 

When, therefore, Minerva saw these men making havoc of the Argives,
she darted down to Ilius from the summits of Olympus, and Apollo,
who was looking on from Pergamus, went out to meet her; for he wanted
the Trojans to be victorious. The pair met by the oak tree, and King
Apollo son of Jove was first to speak. "What would you have said he,
"daughter of great Jove, that your proud spirit has sent you hither
from Olympus? Have you no pity upon the Trojans, and would you incline
the scales of victory in favour of the Danaans? Let me persuade you-
for it will be better thus- stay the combat for to-day, but let them
renew the fight hereafter till they compass the doom of Ilius, since
you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city."

And Minerva answered, "So be it, Far-Darter; it was in this mind that
I came down from Olympus to the Trojans and Achaeans. Tell me, then,
how do you propose to end this present fighting?" 

Apollo, son of Jove, replied, "Let us incite great Hector to challenge
some one of the Danaans in single combat; on this the Achaeans will
be shamed into finding a man who will fight him." 

Minerva assented, and Helenus son of Priam divined the counsel of
the gods; he therefore went up to Hector and said, "Hector son of
Priam, peer of gods in counsel, I am your brother, let me then persuade
you. Bid the other Trojans and Achaeans all of them take their seats,
and challenge the best man among the Achaeans to meet you in single
combat. I have heard the voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour
of your doom is not yet come." 

Hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the Trojans,
grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and they all sat
down. Agamemnon also bade the Achaeans be seated. But Minerva and
Apollo, in the likeness of vultures, perched on father Jove's high
oak tree, proud of their men; and the ranks sat close ranged together,
bristling with shield and helmet and spear. As when the rising west
wind furs the face of the sea and the waters grow dark beneath it,
so sat the companies of Trojans and Achaeans upon the plain. And Hector
spoke thus:- 

"Hear me, Trojans and Achaeans, that I may speak even as I am minded;
Jove on his high throne has brought our oaths and covenants to nothing,
and foreshadows ill for both of us, till you either take the towers
of Troy, or are yourselves vanquished at your ships. The princes of
the Achaeans are here present in the midst of you; let him, then,
that will fight me stand forward as your champion against Hector.
Thus I say, and may Jove be witness between us. If your champion slay
me, let him strip me of my armour and take it to your ships, but let
him send my body home that the Trojans and their wives may give me
my dues of fire when I am dead. In like manner, if Apollo vouchsafe
me glory and I slay your champion, I will strip him of his armour
and take it to the city of Ilius, where I will hang it in the temple
of Apollo, but I will give up his body, that the Achaeans may bury
him at their ships, and the build him a mound by the wide waters of
the Hellespont. Then will one say hereafter as he sails his ship over
the sea, 'This is the monument of one who died long since a champion
who was slain by mighty Hector.' Thus will one say, and my fame shall
not be lost." 

Thus did he speak, but they all held their peace, ashamed to decline
the challenge, yet fearing to accept it, till at last Menelaus rose
and rebuked them, for he was angry. "Alas," he cried, "vain braggarts,
women forsooth not men, double-dyed indeed will be the stain upon
us if no man of the Danaans will now face Hector. May you be turned
every man of you into earth and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious
in your places. I will myself go out against this man, but the upshot
of the fight will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods."

With these words he put on his armour; and then, O Menelaus, your
life would have come to an end at the hands of hands of Hector, for
he was far better the man, had not the princes of the Achaeans sprung
upon you and checked you. King Agamemnon caught him by the right hand
and said, "Menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. Be patient
in spite of passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger
than yourself as Hector son of Priam, who is feared by many another
as well as you. Even Achilles, who is far more doughty than you are,
shrank from meeting him in battle. Sit down your own people, and the
Achaeans will send some other champion to fight Hector; fearless and
fond of battle though he be, I ween his knees will bend gladly under
him if he comes out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight."

With these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother, whereon
his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders. Then
Nestor rose and spoke, "Of a truth," said he, "the Achaean land is
fallen upon evil times. The old knight Peleus, counsellor and orator
among the Myrmidons, loved when I was in his house to question me
concerning the race and lineage of all the Argives. How would it not
grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before Hector? Many
a time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave
his body and go down within the house of Hades. Would, by father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo, that I were still young and strong as when the
Pylians and Arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river Celadon
under the walls of Pheia, and round about the waters of the river
Iardanus. The godlike hero Ereuthalion stood forward as their champion,
with the armour of King Areithous upon his shoulders- Areithous whom
men and women had surnamed 'the Mace-man,' because he fought neither
with bow nor spear, but broke the battalions of the foe with his iron
mace. Lycurgus killed him, not in fair fight, but by entrapping him
in a narrow way where his mace served him in no stead; for Lycurgus
was too quick for him and speared him through the middle, so he fell
to earth on his back. Lycurgus then spoiled him of the armour which
Mars had given him, and bore it in battle thenceforward; but when
he grew old and stayed at home, he gave it to his faithful squire
Ereuthalion, who in this same armour challenged the foremost men among
us. The others quaked and quailed, but my high spirit bade me fight
him though none other would venture; I was the youngest man of them
all; but when I fought him Minerva vouchsafed me victory. He was the
biggest and strongest man that ever I killed, and covered much ground
as he lay sprawling upon the earth. Would that I were still young
and strong as I then was, for the son of Priam would then soon find
one who would face him. But you, foremost among the whole host though
you be, have none of you any stomach for fighting Hector."

Thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to
their feet. Foremost of all uprose King Agamemnon, and after him brave
Diomed the son of Tydeus. Next were the two Ajaxes, men clothed in
valour as with a garment, and then Idomeneus, and Meriones his brother
in arms. After these Eurypylus son of Euaemon, Thoas the son of Andraemon,
and Ulysses also rose. Then Nestor knight of Gerene again spoke, saying:
"Cast lots among you to see who shall be chosen. If he come alive
out of this fight he will have done good service alike to his own
soul and to the Achaeans." 

Thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown
it into the helmet of Agamemnon son of Atreus, the people lifted their
hands in prayer, and thus would one of them say as he looked into
the vault of heaven, "Father Jove, grant that the lot fall on Ajax,
or on the son of Tydeus, or upon the king of rich Mycene himself."

As they were speaking, Nestor knight of Gerene shook the helmet, and
from it there fell the very lot which they wanted- the lot of Ajax.
The herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the
Achaeans, going from left to right; but they none of of them owned
it. When, however, in due course he reached the man who had written
upon it and had put it into the helmet, brave Ajax held out his hand,
and the herald gave him the lot. When Ajax saw him mark he knew it
and was glad; he threw it to the ground and said, "My friends, the
lot is mine, and I rejoice, for I shall vanquish Hector. I will put
on my armour; meanwhile, pray to King Jove in silence among yourselves
that the Trojans may not hear you- or aloud if you will, for we fear
no man. None shall overcome me, neither by force nor cunning, for
I was born and bred in Salamis, and can hold my own in all things."

With this they fell praying to King Jove the son of Saturn, and thus
would one of them say as he looked into the vault of heaven, "Father
Jove that rulest from Ida, most glorious in power, vouchsafe victory
to Ajax, and let him win great glory: but if you wish well to Hector
also and would protect him, grant to each of them equal fame and prowess.

Thus they prayed, and Ajax armed himself in his suit of gleaming bronze.
When he was in full array he sprang forward as monstrous Mars when
he takes part among men whom Jove has set fighting with one another-
even so did huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans, spring forward with
a grim smile on his face as he brandished his long spear and strode
onward. The Argives were elated as they beheld him, but the Trojans
trembled in every limb, and the heart even of Hector beat quickly,
but he could not now retreat and withdraw into the ranks behind him,
for he had been the challenger. Ajax came up bearing his shield in
front of him like a wall- a shield of bronze with seven folds of oxhide-
the work of Tychius, who lived in Hyle and was by far the best worker
in leather. He had made it with the hides of seven full-fed bulls,
and over these he had set an eighth layer of bronze. Holding this
shield before him, Ajax son of Telamon came close up to Hector, and
menaced him saying, "Hector, you shall now learn, man to man, what
kind of champions the Danaans have among them even besides lion-hearted
Achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. He now abides at the ships in
anger with Agamemnon shepherd of his people, but there are many of
us who are well able to face you; therefore begin the fight."

And Hector answered, "Noble Ajax, son of Telamon, captain of the host,
treat me not as though I were some puny boy or woman that cannot fight.
I have been long used to the blood and butcheries of battle. I am
quick to turn my leathern shield either to right or left, for this
I deem the main thing in battle. I can charge among the chariots and
horsemen, and in hand to hand fighting can delight the heart of Mars;
howbeit I would not take such a man as you are off his guard- but
I will smite you openly if I can." 

He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it from him. It struck
the sevenfold shield in its outermost layer- the eighth, which was
of bronze- and went through six of the layers but in the seventh hide
it stayed. Then Ajax threw in his turn, and struck the round shield
of the son of Priam. The terrible spear went through his gleaming
shield, and pressed onward through his cuirass of cunning workmanship;
it pierced the shirt against his side, but he swerved and thus saved
his life. They then each of them drew out the spear from his shield,
and fell on one another like savage lions or wild boars of great strength
and endurance: the son of Priam struck the middle of Ajax's shield,
but the bronze did not break, and the point of his dart was turned.
Ajax then sprang forward and pierced the shield of Hector; the spear
went through it and staggered him as he was springing forward to attack;
it gashed his neck and the blood came pouring from the wound, but
even so Hector did not cease fighting; he gave ground, and with his
brawny hand seized a stone, rugged and huge, that was lying upon the
plain; with this he struck the shield of Ajax on the boss that was
in its middle, so that the bronze rang again. But Ajax in turn caught
up a far larger stone, swung it aloft, and hurled it with prodigious
force. This millstone of a rock broke Hector's shield inwards and
threw him down on his back with the shield crushing him under it,
but Apollo raised him at once. Thereon they would have hacked at one
another in close combat with their swords, had not heralds, messengers
of gods and men, come forward, one from the Trojans and the other
from the Achaeans- Talthybius and Idaeus both of them honourable men;
these parted them with their staves, and the good herald Idaeus said,
"My sons, fight no longer, you are both of you valiant, and both are
dear to Jove; we know this; but night is now falling, and the behests
of night may not be well gainsaid." 

Ajax son of Telamon answered, "Idaeus, bid Hector say so, for it was
he that challenged our princes. Let him speak first and I will accept
his saying." 

Then Hector said, "Ajax, heaven has vouchsafed you stature and strength,
and judgement; and in wielding the spear you excel all others of the
Achaeans. Let us for this day cease fighting; hereafter we will fight
anew till heaven decide between us, and give victory to one or to
the other; night is now falling, and the behests of night may not
be well gainsaid. Gladden, then, the hearts of the Achaeans at your
ships, and more especially those of your own followers and clansmen,
while I, in the great city of King Priam, bring comfort to the Trojans
and their women, who vie with one another in their prayers on my behalf.
Let us, moreover, exchange presents that it may be said among the
Achaeans and Trojans, 'They fought with might and main, but were reconciled
and parted in friendship.' 

On this he gave Ajax a silver-studded sword with its sheath and leathern
baldric, and in return Ajax gave him a girdle dyed with purple. Thus
they parted, the one going to the host of the Achaeans, and the other
to that of the Trojans, who rejoiced when they saw their hero come
to them safe and unharmed from the strong hands of mighty Ajax. They
led him, therefore, to the city as one that had been saved beyond
their hopes. On the other side the Achaeans brought Ajax elated with
victory to Agamemnon. 

When they reached the quarters of the son of Atreus, Agamemnon sacrificed
for them a five-year-old bull in honour of Jove the son of Saturn.
They flayed the carcass, made it ready, and divided it into joints;
these they cut carefully up into smaller pieces, putting them on the
spits, roasting them sufficiently, and then drawing them off. When
they had done all this and had prepared the feast, they ate it, and
every man had his full and equal share, so that all were satisfied,
and King Agamemnon gave Ajax some slices cut lengthways down the loin,
as a mark of special honour. As soon as they had had enough to cat
and drink, old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest began to speak;
with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:-

"Son of Atreus, and other chieftains, inasmuch as many of the Achaeans
are now dead, whose blood Mars has shed by the banks of the Scamander,
and their souls have gone down to the house of Hades, it will be well
when morning comes that we should cease fighting; we will then wheel
our dead together with oxen and mules and burn them not far from the
ships, that when we sail hence we may take the bones of our comrades
home to their children. Hard by the funeral pyre we will build a barrow
that shall be raised from the plain for all in common; near this let
us set about building a high wall, to shelter ourselves and our ships,
and let it have well-made gates that there may be a way through them
for our chariots. Close outside we will dig a deep trench all round
it to keep off both horse and foot, that the Trojan chieftains may
not bear hard upon us." 

Thus he spoke, and the princess shouted in applause. Meanwhile the
Trojans held a council, angry and full of discord, on the acropolis
by the gates of King Priam's palace; and wise Antenor spoke. "Hear
me he said, "Trojans, Dardanians, and allies, that I may speak even
as I am minded. Let us give up Argive Helen and her wealth to the
sons of Atreus, for we are now fighting in violation of our solemn
covenants, and shall not prosper till we have done as I say."

He then sat down and Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen rose to speak.
"Antenor," said he, "your words are not to my liking; you can find
a better saying than this if you will; if, however, you have spoken
in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason.
I will speak plainly, and hereby notify to the Trojans that I will
not give up the woman; but the wealth that I brought home with her
from Argos I will restore, and will add yet further of my own."

On this, when Paris had spoken and taken his seat, Priam of the race
of Dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity
and goodwill addressed them thus: "Hear me, Trojans, Dardanians, and
allies, that I may speak even as I am minded. Get your suppers now
as hitherto throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful.
At daybreak let Idaeus go to the ships, and tell Agamemnon and Menelaus
sons of Atreus the saying of Alexandrus through whom this quarrel
has come about; and let him also be instant with them that they now
cease fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew,
till heaven decide between us and give victory to one or to the other."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They took supper
in their companies and at daybreak Idaeus went his wa to the ships.
He found the Danaans, servants of Mars, in council at the stern of
Agamemnon's ship, and took his place in the midst of them. "Son of
Atreus," he said, "and princes of the Achaean host, Priam and the
other noble Trojans have sent me to tell you the saying of Alexandrus
through whom this quarrel has come about, if so be that you may find
it acceptable. All the treasure he took with him in his ships to Troy-
would that he had sooner perished- he will restore, and will add yet
further of his own, but he will not give up the wedded wife of Menelaus,
though the Trojans would have him do so. Priam bade me inquire further
if you will cease fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will
fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give victory to one
or to the other." 

They all held their peace, but presently Diomed of the loud war-cry
spoke, saying, "Let there be no taking, neither treasure, nor yet
Helen, for even a child may see that the doom of the Trojans is at
hand." 

The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words that Diomed
had spoken, and thereon King Agamemnon said to Idaeus, "Idaeus, you
have heard the answer the Achaeans make you-and I with them. But as
concerning the dead, I give you leave to burn them, for when men are
once dead there should be no grudging them the rites of fire. Let
Jove the mighty husband of Juno be witness to this covenant."

As he spoke he upheld his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and
Idaeus went back to the strong city of Ilius. The Trojans and Dardanians
were gathered in council waiting his return; when he came, he stood
in their midst and delivered his message. As soon as they heard it
they set about their twofold labour, some to gather the corpses, and
others to bring in wood. The Argives on their part also hastened from
their ships, some to gather the corpses, and others to bring in wood.

The sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh risen into the
vault of heaven from the slow still currents of deep Oceanus, when
the two armies met. They could hardly recognise their dead, but they
washed the clotted gore from off them, shed tears over them, and lifted
them upon their waggons. Priam had forbidden the Trojans to wail aloud,
so they heaped their dead sadly and silently upon the pyre, and having
burned them went back to the city of Ilius. The Achaeans in like manner
heaped their dead sadly and silently on the pyre, and having burned
them went back to their ships. 

Now in the twilight when it was not yet dawn, chosen bands of the
Achaeans were gathered round the pyre and built one barrow that was
raised in common for all, and hard by this they built a high wall
to shelter themselves and their ships; they gave it strong gates that
there might be a way through them for their chariots, and close outside
it they dug a trench deep and wide, and they planted it within with
stakes. 

Thus did the Achaeans toil, and the gods, seated by the side of Jove
the lord of lightning, marvelled at their great work; but Neptune,
lord of the earthquake, spoke, saying, "Father Jove, what mortal in
the whole world will again take the gods into his counsel? See you
not how the Achaeans have built a wall about their ships and driven
a trench all round it, without offering hecatombs to the gods? The
The fame of this wall will reach as far as dawn itself, and men will
no longer think anything of the one which Phoebus Apollo and myself
built with so much labour for Laomedon." 

Jove was displeased and answered, "What, O shaker of the earth, are
you talking about? A god less powerful than yourself might be alarmed
at what they are doing, but your fame reaches as far as dawn itself.
Surely when the Achaeans have gone home with their ships, you can
shatter their wall and Ring it into the sea; you can cover the beach
with sand again, and the great wall of the Achaeans will then be utterly
effaced." 

Thus did they converse, and by sunset the work of the Achaeans was
completed; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got their
supper. Many ships had come with wine from Lemnos, sent by Euneus
the son of Jason, born to him by Hypsipyle. The son of Jason freighted
them with ten thousand measures of wine, which he sent specially to
the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus. From this supply the Achaeans
bought their wine, some with bronze, some with iron, some with hides,
some with whole heifers, and some again with captives. They spread
a goodly banquet and feasted the whole night through, as also did
the Trojans and their allies in the city. But all the time Jove boded
them ill and roared with his portentous thunder. Pale fear got hold
upon them, and they spilled the wine from their cups on to the ground,
nor did any dare drink till he had made offerings to the most mighty
son of Saturn. Then they laid themselves down to rest and enjoyed
the boon of sleep. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VIII

Now when Morning, clad in her robe of saffron, had begun to suffuse
light over the earth, Jove called the gods in council on the topmost
crest of serrated Olympus. Then he spoke and all the other gods gave
ear. "Hear me," said he, "gods and goddesses, that I may speak even
as I am minded. Let none of you neither goddess nor god try to cross
me, but obey me every one of you that I may bring this matter to an
end. If I see anyone acting apart and helping either Trojans or Danaans,
he shall be beaten inordinately ere he come back again to Olympus;
or I will hurl him down into dark Tartarus far into the deepest pit
under the earth, where the gates are iron and the floor bronze, as
far beneath Hades as heaven is high above the earth, that you may
learn how much the mightiest I am among you. Try me and find out for
yourselves. Hangs me a golden chain from heaven, and lay hold of it
all of you, gods and goddesses together- tug as you will, you will
not drag Jove the supreme counsellor from heaven to earth; but were
I to pull at it myself I should draw you up with earth and sea into
the bargain, then would I bind the chain about some pinnacle of Olympus
and leave you all dangling in the mid firmament. So far am I above
all others either of gods or men." 

They were frightened and all of them of held their peace, for he had
spoken masterfully; but at last Minerva answered, "Father, son of
Saturn, king of kings, we all know that your might is not to be gainsaid,
but we are also sorry for the Danaan warriors, who are perishing and
coming to a bad end. We will, however, since you so bid us, refrain
from actual fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to
the Argives that they may not all of them perish in your displeasure."

Jove smiled at her and answered, "Take heart, my child, Trito-born;
I am not really in earnest, and I wish to be kind to you."

With this he yoked his fleet horses, with hoofs of bronze and manes
of glittering gold. He girded himself also with gold about the body,
seized his gold whip and took his seat in his chariot. Thereon he
lashed his horses and they flew forward nothing loth midway twixt
earth and starry heaven. After a while he reached many-fountained
Ida, mother of wild beasts, and Gargarus, where are his grove and
fragrant altar. There the father of gods and men stayed his horses,
took them from the chariot, and hid them in a thick cloud; then he
took his seat all glorious upon the topmost crests, looking down upon
the city of Troy and the ships of the Achaeans. 

The Achaeans took their morning meal hastily at the ships, and afterwards
put on their armour. The Trojans on the other hand likewise armed
themselves throughout the city, fewer in numbers but nevertheless
eager perforce to do battle for their wives and children. All the
gates were flung wide open, and horse and foot sallied forth with
the tramp as of a great multitude. 

When they were got together in one place, shield clashed with shield,
and spear with spear, in the conflict of mail-clad men. Mighty was
the din as the bossed shields pressed hard on one another- death-
cry and shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red
with blood. 

Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning their weapons
beat against one another, and the people fell, but when the sun had
reached mid-heaven, the sire of all balanced his golden scales, and
put two fates of death within them, one for the Trojans and the other
for the Achaeans. He took the balance by the middle, and when he lifted
it up the day of the Achaeans sank; the death-fraught scale of the
Achaeans settled down upon the ground, while that of the Trojans rose
heavenwards. Then he thundered aloud from Ida, and sent the glare
of his lightning upon the Achaeans; when they saw this, pale fear
fell upon them and they were sore afraid. 

Idomeneus dared not stay nor yet Agamemnon, nor did the two Ajaxes,
servants of Mars, hold their ground. Nestor knight of Gerene alone
stood firm, bulwark of the Achaeans, not of his own will, but one
of his horses was disabled. Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen had
hit it with an arrow just on the top of its head where the mane begins
to grow away from the skull, a very deadly place. The horse bounded
in his anguish as the arrow pierced his brain, and his struggles threw
others into confusion. The old man instantly began cutting the traces
with his sword, but Hector's fleet horses bore down upon him through
the rout with their bold charioteer, even Hector himself, and the
old man would have perished there and then had not Diomed been quick
to mark, and with a loud cry called Ulysses to help him.

"Ulysses," he cried, "noble son of Laertes where are you flying to,
with your back turned like a coward? See that you are not struck with
a spear between the shoulders. Stay here and help me to defend Nestor
from this man's furious onset." 

Ulysses would not give ear, but sped onward to the ships of the Achaeans,
and the son of Tydeus flinging himself alone into the thick of the
fight took his stand before the horses of the son of Neleus. "Sir,"
said he, "these young warriors are pressing you hard, your force is
spent, and age is heavy upon you, your squire is naught, and your
horses are slow to move. Mount my chariot and see what the horses
of Tros can do- how cleverly they can scud hither and thither over
the plain either in flight or in pursuit. I took them from the hero
Aeneas. Let our squires attend to your own steeds, but let us drive
mine straight at the Trojans, that Hector may learn how furiously
I too can wield my spear." 

Nestor knight of Gerene hearkened to his words. Thereon the doughty
squires, Sthenelus and kind-hearted Eurymedon, saw to Nestor's horses,
while the two both mounted Diomed's chariot. Nestor took the reins
in his hands and lashed the horses on; they were soon close up with
Hector, and the son of Tydeus aimed a spear at him as he was charging
full speed towards them. He missed him, but struck his charioteer
and squire Eniopeus son of noble Thebaeus in the breast by the nipple
while the reins were in his hands, so that he died there and then,
and the horses swerved as he fell headlong from the chariot. Hector
was greatly grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but let him lie
for all his sorrow, while he went in quest of another driver; nor
did his steeds have to go long without one, for he presently found
brave Archeptolemus the son of Iphitus, and made him get up behind
the horses, giving the reins into his hand. 

All had then been lost and no help for it, for they would have been
penned up in Ilius like sheep, had not the sire of gods and men been
quick to mark, and hurled a fiery flaming thunderbolt which fell just
in front of Diomed's horses with a flare of burning brimstone. The
horses were frightened and tried to back beneath the car, while the
reins dropped from Nestor's hands. Then he was afraid and said to
Diomed, "Son of Tydeus, turn your horses in flight; see you not that
the hand of Jove is against you? To-day he vouchsafes victory to Hector;
to-morrow, if it so please him, he will again grant it to ourselves;
no man, however brave, may thwart the purpose of Jove, for he is far
stronger than any." 

Diomed answered, "All that you have said is true; there is a grief
however which pierces me to the very heart, for Hector will talk among
the Trojans and say, 'The son of Tydeus fled before me to the ships.'
This is the vaunt he will make, and may earth then swallow me."

"Son of Tydeus," replied Nestor, "what mean you? Though Hector say
that you are a coward the Trojans and Dardanians will not believe
him, nor yet the wives of the mighty warriors whom you have laid low."

So saying he turned the horses back through the thick of the battle,
and with a cry that rent the air the Trojans and Hector rained their
darts after them. Hector shouted to him and said, "Son of Tydeus,
the Danaans have done you honour hitherto as regards your place at
table, the meals they give you, and the filling of your cup with wine.
Henceforth they will despise you, for you are become no better than
a woman. Be off, girl and coward that you are, you shall not scale
our walls through any Hinching upon my part; neither shall you carry
off our wives in your ships, for I shall kill you with my own hand."

The son of Tydeus was in two minds whether or no to turn his horses
round again and fight him. Thrice did he doubt, and thrice did Jove
thunder from the heights of. Ida in token to the Trojans that he would
turn the battle in their favour. Hector then shouted to them and said,
"Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians, lovers of close fighting, be men,
my friends, and fight with might and with main; I see that Jove is
minded to vouchsafe victory and great glory to myself, while he will
deal destruction upon the Danaans. Fools, for having thought of building
this weak and worthless wall. It shall not stay my fury; my horses
will spring lightly over their trench, and when I am at their ships
forget not to bring me fire that I may burn them, while I slaughter
the Argives who will be all dazed and bewildered by the smoke."

Then he cried to his horses, "Xanthus and Podargus, and you Aethon
and goodly Lampus, pay me for your keep now and for all the honey-sweet
corn with which Andromache daughter of great Eetion has fed you, and
for she has mixed wine and water for you to drink whenever you would,
before doing so even for me who am her own husband. Haste in pursuit,
that we may take the shield of Nestor, the fame of which ascends to
heaven, for it is of solid gold, arm-rods and all, and that we may
strip from the shoulders of Diomed. the cuirass which Vulcan made
him. Could we take these two things, the Achaeans would set sail in
their ships this self-same night." 

Thus did he vaunt, but Queen Juno made high Olympus quake as she shook
with rage upon her throne. Then said she to the mighty god of Neptune,
"What now, wide ruling lord of the earthquake? Can you find no compassion
in your heart for the dying Danaans, who bring you many a welcome
offering to Helice and to Aegae? Wish them well then. If all of us
who are with the Danaans were to drive the Trojans back and keep Jove
from helping them, he would have to sit there sulking alone on Ida."

King Neptune was greatly troubled and answered, "Juno, rash of tongue,
what are you talking about? We other gods must not set ourselves against
Jove, for he is far stronger than we are." 

Thus did they converse; but the whole space enclosed by the ditch,
from the ships even to the wall, was filled with horses and warriors,
who were pent up there by Hector son of Priam, now that the hand of
Jove was with him. He would even have set fire to the ships and burned
them, had not Queen Juno put it into the mind of Agamemnon, to bestir
himself and to encourage the Achaeans. To this end he went round the
ships and tents carrying a great purple cloak, and took his stand
by the huge black hull of Ulysses' ship, which was middlemost of all;
it was from this place that his voice would carry farthest, on the
one hand towards the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other
towards those of Achilles- for these two heroes, well assured of their
own strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends
of the line. From this spot then, with a voice that could be heard
afar, he shouted to the Danaans, saying, "Argives, shame on you cowardly
creatures, brave in semblance only; where are now our vaunts that
we should prove victorious- the vaunts we made so vaingloriously in
Lemnos, when we ate the flesh of horned cattle and filled our mixing-bowls
to the brim? You vowed that you would each of you stand against a
hundred or two hundred men, and now you prove no match even for one-
for Hector, who will be ere long setting our ships in a blaze. Father
Jove, did you ever so ruin a great king and rob him so utterly of
his greatness? yet, when to my sorrow I was coming hither, I never
let my ship pass your altars without offering the fat and thigh-bones
of heifers upon every one of them, so eager was I to sack the city
of Troy. Vouchsafe me then this prayer- suffer us to escape at any
rate with our lives, and let not the Achaeans be so utterly vanquished
by the Trojans." 

Thus did he pray, and father Jove pitying his tears vouchsafed him
that his people should live, not die; forthwith he sent them an eagle,
most unfailingly portentous of all birds, with a young fawn in its
talons; the eagle dropped the fawn by the altar on which the Achaeans
sacrificed to Jove the lord of omens; When, therefore, the people
saw that the bird had come from Jove, they sprang more fiercely upon
the Trojans and fought more boldly. 

There was no man of all the many Danaans who could then boast that
he had driven his horses over the trench and gone forth to fight sooner
than the son of Tydeus; long before any one else could do so he slew
an armed warrior of the Trojans, Agelaus the son of Phradmon. He had
turned his horses in flight, but the spear struck him in the back
midway between his shoulders and went right through his chest, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell forward from his chariot.

After him came Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus, the two Ajaxes
clothed in valour as with a garment, Idomeneus and his companion in
arms Meriones, peer of murderous Mars, and Eurypylus the brave son
of Euaemon. Ninth came Teucer with his bow, and took his place under
cover of the shield of Ajax son of Telamon. When Ajax lifted his shield
Teucer would peer round, and when he had hit any one in the throng,
the man would fall dead; then Teucer would hie back to Ajax as a child
to its mother, and again duck down under his shield. 

Which of the Trojans did brave Teucer first kill? Orsilochus, and
then Ormenus and Ophelestes, Daetor, Chromius, and godlike Lycophontes,
Amopaon son of Polyaemon, and Melanippus. these in turn did he lay
low upon the earth, and King Agamemnon was glad when he saw him making
havoc of the Trojans with his mighty bow. He went up to him and said,
"Teucer, man after my own heart, son of Telamon, captain among the
host, shoot on, and be at once the saving of the Danaans and the glory
of your father Telamon, who brought you up and took care of you in
his own house when you were a child, bastard though you were. Cover
him with glory though he is far off; I will promise and I will assuredly
perform; if aegis-bearing Jove and Minerva grant me to sack the city
of Ilius, you shall have the next best meed of honour after my own-
a tripod, or two horses with their chariot, or a woman who shall go
up into your bed." 

And Teucer answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, you need not urge
me; from the moment we began to drive them back to Ilius, I have never
ceased so far as in me lies to look out for men whom I can shoot and
kill; I have shot eight barbed shafts, and all of them have been buried
in the flesh of warlike youths, but this mad dog I cannot hit."

As he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at Hector, for he was
bent on hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow hit
Priam's brave son Gorgythion in the breast. His mother, fair Castianeira,
lovely as a goddess, had been married from Aesyme, and now he bowed
his head as a garden poppy in full bloom when it is weighed down by
showers in spring- even thus heavy bowed his head beneath the weight
of his helmet. 

Again he aimed at Hector, for he was longing to hit him, and again
his arrow missed, for Apollo turned it aside; but he hit Hector's
brave charioteer Archeptolemus in the breast, by the nipple, as he
was driving furiously into the fight. The horses swerved aside as
he fell headlong from the chariot, and there was no life left in him.
Hector was greatly grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but for
all his sorrow he let him lie where he fell, and bade his brother
Cebriones, who was hard by, take the reins. Cebriones did as he had
said. Hector thereon with a loud cry sprang from his chariot to the
ground, and seizing a great stone made straight for Teucer with intent
kill him. Teucer had just taken an arrow from his quiver and had laid
it upon the bow-string, but Hector struck him with the jagged stone
as he was taking aim and drawing the string to his shoulder; he hit
him just where the collar-bone divides the neck from the chest, a
very deadly place, and broke the sinew of his arm so that his wrist
was less, and the bow dropped from his hand as he fell forward on
his knees. Ajax saw that his brother had fallen, and running towards
him bestrode him and sheltered him with his shield. Meanwhile his
two trusty squires, Mecisteus son of Echius, and Alastor, came up
and bore him to the ships groaning in his great pain. 

Jove now again put heart into the Trojans, and they drove the Achaeans
to their deep trench with Hector in all his glory at their head. As
a hound grips a wild boar or lion in flank or buttock when he gives
him chase, and watches warily for his wheeling, even so did Hector
follow close upon the Achaeans, ever killing the hindmost as they
rushed panic-stricken onwards. When they had fled through the set
stakes and trench and many Achaeans had been laid low at the hands
of the Trojans, they halted at their ships, calling upon one another
and praying every man instantly as they lifted up their hands to the
gods; but Hector wheeled his horses this way and that, his eyes glaring
like those of Gorgo or murderous Mars. 

Juno when she saw them had pity upon them, and at once said to Minerva,
"Alas, child of aegis-bearing Jove, shall you and I take no more thought
for the dying Danaans, though it be the last time we ever do so? See
how they perish and come to a bad end before the onset of but a single
man. Hector the son of Priam rages with intolerable fury, and has
already done great mischief." 

Minerva answered, "Would, indeed, this fellow might die in his own
land, and fall by the hands of the Achaeans; but my father Jove is
mad with spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and unjust. He forgets
how often I saved his son when he was worn out by the labours Eurystheus
had laid on him. He would weep till his cry came up to heaven, and
then Jove would send me down to help him; if I had had the sense to
foresee all this, when Eurystheus sent him to the house of Hades,
to fetch the hell-hound from Erebus, he would never have come back
alive out of the deep waters of the river Styx. And now Jove hates
me, while he lets Thetis have her way because she kissed his knees
and took hold of his beard, when she was begging him to do honour
to Achilles. I shall know what to do next time he begins calling me
his grey-eyed darling. Get our horses ready, while I go within the
house of aegis-bearing Jove and put on my armour; we shall then find
out whether Priam's son Hector will be glad to meet us in the highways
of battle, or whether the Trojans will glut hounds and vultures with
the fat of their flesh as they he dead by the ships of the Achaeans."

Thus did she speak and white-armed Juno, daughter of great Saturn,
obeyed her words; she set about harnessing her gold-bedizened steeds,
while Minerva daughter of aegis-bearing Jove flung her richly vesture,
made with her own hands, on to the threshold of her father, and donned
the shirt of Jove, arming herself for battle. Then she stepped into
her flaming chariot, and grasped the spear so stout and sturdy and
strong with which she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased
her. Juno lashed her horses, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they
flew open of their own accord- gates over which the Hours preside,
in whose hands are heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud
that hides them or to close it. Through these the goddesses drove
their obedient steeds. 

But father Jove when he saw them from Ida was very angry, and sent
winged Iris with a message to them. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, turn
them back, and see that they do not come near me, for if we come to
fighting there will be mischief. This is what I say, and this is what
I mean to do. I will lame their horses for them; I will hurl them
from their chariot, and will break it in pieces. It will take them
all ten years to heal the wounds my lightning shall inflict upon them;
my grey-eyed daughter will then learn what quarrelling with her father
means. I am less surprised and angry with Juno, for whatever I say
she always contradicts me." 

With this Iris went her way, fleet as the wind, from the heights of
Ida to the lofty summits of Olympus. She met the goddesses at the
outer gates of its many valleys and gave them her message. "What,"
said she, "are you about? Are you mad? The son of Saturn forbids going.
This is what he says, and this is he means to do, he will lame your
horses for you, he will hurl you from your chariot, and will break
it in pieces. It will take you all ten years to heal the wounds his
lightning will inflict upon you, that you may learn, grey-eyed goddess,
what quarrelling with your father means. He is less hurt and angry
with Juno, for whatever he says she always contradicts him but you,
bold bold hussy, will you really dare to raise your huge spear in
defiance of Jove?" 

With this she left them, and Juno said to Minerva, "Of a truth, child
of aegis-bearing Jove, I am not for fighting men's battles further
in defiance of Jove. Let them live or die as luck will have it, and
let Jove mete out his judgements upon the Trojans and Danaans according
to his own pleasure." 

She turned her steeds; the Hours presently unyoked them, made them
fast to their ambrosial mangers, and leaned the chariot against the
end wall of the courtyard. The two goddesses then sat down upon their
golden thrones, amid the company of the other gods; but they were
very angry. 

Presently father Jove drove his chariot to Olympus, and entered the
assembly of gods. The mighty lord of the earthquake unyoked his horses
for him, set the car upon its stand, and threw a cloth over it. Jove
then sat down upon his golden throne and Olympus reeled beneath him.
Minerva and Juno sat alone, apart from Jove, and neither spoke nor
asked him questions, but Jove knew what they meant, and said, "Minerva
and Juno, why are you so angry? Are you fatigued with killing so many
of your dear friends the Trojans? Be this as it may, such is the might
of my hands that all the gods in Olympus cannot turn me; you were
both of you trembling all over ere ever you saw the fight and its
terrible doings. I tell you therefore-and it would have surely been-
I should have struck you with lighting, and your chariots would never
have brought you back again to Olympus." 

Minerva and Juno groaned in spirit as they sat side by side and brooded
mischief for the Trojans. Minerva sat silent without a word, for she
was in a furious passion and bitterly incensed against her father;
but Juno could not contain herself and said, "What, dread son of Saturn,
are you talking about? We know how great your power is, nevertheless
we have compassion upon the Danaan warriors who are perishing and
coming to a bad end. We will, however, since you so bid us, refrain
from actual fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to
the Argives, that they may not all of them perish in your displeasure."

And Jove answered, "To-morrow morning, Juno, if you choose to do so,
you will see the son of Saturn destroying large numbers of the Argives,
for fierce Hector shall not cease fighting till he has roused the
son of Peleus when they are fighting in dire straits at their ships'
sterns about the body of Patroclus. Like it or no, this is how it
is decreed; for aught I care, you may go to the lowest depths beneath
earth and sea, where Iapetus and Saturn dwell in lone Tartarus with
neither ray of light nor breath of wind to cheer them. You may go
on and on till you get there, and I shall not care one whit for your
displeasure; you are the greatest vixen living." 

Juno made him no answer. The sun's glorious orb now sank into Oceanus
and drew down night over the land. Sorry indeed were the Trojans when
light failed them, but welcome and thrice prayed for did darkness
fall upon the Achaeans. 

Then Hector led the Trojans back from the ships, and held a council
on the open space near the river, where there was a spot ear corpses.
They left their chariots and sat down on the ground to hear the speech
he made them. He grasped a spear eleven cubits long, the bronze point
of which gleamed in front of it, while the ring round the spear-head
was of gold Spear in hand he spoke. "Hear me," said he, "Trojans,
Dardanians, and allies. I deemed but now that I should destroy the
ships and all the Achaeans with them ere I went back to Ilius, but
darkness came on too soon. It was this alone that saved them and their
ships upon the seashore. Now, therefore, let us obey the behests of
night, and prepare our suppers. Take your horses out of their chariots
and give them their feeds of corn; then make speed to bring sheep
and cattle from the city; bring wine also and corn for your horses
and gather much wood, that from dark till dawn we may burn watchfires
whose flare may reach to heaven. For the Achaeans may try to fly beyond
the sea by night, and they must not embark scatheless and unmolested;
many a man among them must take a dart with him to nurse at home,
hit with spear or arrow as he is leaping on board his ship, that others
may fear to bring war and weeping upon the Trojans. Moreover let the
heralds tell it about the city that the growing youths and grey-bearded
men are to camp upon its heaven-built walls. Let the women each of
them light a great fire in her house, and let watch be safely kept
lest the town be entered by surprise while the host is outside. See
to it, brave Trojans, as I have said, and let this suffice for the
moment; at daybreak I will instruct you further. I pray in hope to
Jove and to the gods that we may then drive those fate-sped hounds
from our land, for 'tis the fates that have borne them and their ships
hither. This night, therefore, let us keep watch, but with early morning
let us put on our armour and rouse fierce war at the ships of the
Achaeans; I shall then know whether brave Diomed the son of Tydeus
will drive me back from the ships to the wall, or whether I shall
myself slay him and carry off his bloodstained spoils. To-morrow let
him show his mettle, abide my spear if he dare. I ween that at break
of day, he shall be among the first to fall and many another of his
comrades round him. Would that I were as sure of being immortal and
never growing old, and of being worshipped like Minerva and Apollo,
as I am that this day will bring evil to the Argives." 

Thus spoke Hector and the Trojans shouted applause. They took their
sweating steeds from under the yoke, and made them fast each by his
own chariot. They made haste to bring sheep and cattle from the city,
they brought wine also and corn from their houses and gathered much
wood. They then offered unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, and
the wind carried the sweet savour of sacrifice to heaven- but the
blessed gods partook not thereof, for they bitterly hated Ilius with
Priam and Priam's people. Thus high in hope they sat through the livelong
night by the highways of war, and many a watchfire did they kindle.
As when the stars shine clear, and the moon is bright- there is not
a breath of air, not a peak nor glade nor jutting headland but it
stands out in the ineffable radiance that breaks from the serene of
heaven; the stars can all of them be told and the heart of the shepherd
is glad- even thus shone the watchfires of the Trojans before Ilius
midway between the ships and the river Xanthus. A thousand camp-fires
gleamed upon the plain, and in the glow of each there sat fifty men,
while the horses, champing oats and corn beside their chariots, waited
till dawn should come. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IX

Thus did the Trojans watch. But Panic, comrade of blood-stained Rout,
had taken fast hold of the Achaeans and their princes were all of
them in despair. As when the two winds that blow from Thrace- the
north and the northwest- spring up of a sudden and rouse the fury
of the main- in a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter
their sea-wrack in all directions- even thus troubled were the hearts
of the Achaeans. 

The son of Atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a
council man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made haste
also himself to call them, and they sat sorry at heart in their assembly.
Agamemnon shed tears as it were a running stream or cataract on the
side of some sheer cliff; and thus, with many a heavy sigh he spoke
to the Achaeans. "My friends," said he, "princes and councillors of
the Argives, the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. Cruel
Jove gave me his solemn promise that I should sack the city of Troy
before returning, but he has played me false, and is now bidding me
go ingloriously back to Argos with the loss of much people. Such is
the will of Jove, who has laid many a proud city in the dust as he
will yet lay others, for his power is above all. Now, therefore, let
us all do as I say and sail back to our own country, for we shall
not take Troy." 

Thus he spoke, and the sons of the Achaeans for a long while sat sorrowful
there, but they all held their peace, till at last Diomed of the loud
battle-cry made answer saying, "Son of Atreus, I will chide your folly,
as is my right in council. Be not then aggrieved that I should do
so. In the first place you attacked me before all the Danaans and
said that I was a coward and no soldier. The Argives young and old
know that you did so. But the son of scheming Saturn endowed you by
halves only. He gave you honour as the chief ruler over us, but valour,
which is the highest both right and might he did not give you. Sir,
think you that the sons of the Achaeans are indeed as unwarlike and
cowardly as you say they are? If your own mind is set upon going home-
go- the way is open to you; the many ships that followed you from
Mycene stand ranged upon the seashore; but the rest of us stay here
till we have sacked Troy. Nay though these too should turn homeward
with their ships, Sthenelus and myself will still fight on till we
reach the goal of Ilius, for for heaven was with us when we came."

The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words of Diomed,
and presently Nestor rose to speak. "Son of Tydeus," said he, "in
war your prowess is beyond question, and in council you excel all
who are of your own years; no one of the Achaeans can make light of
what you say nor gainsay it, but you have not yet come to the end
of the whole matter. You are still young- you might be the youngest
of my own children- still you have spoken wisely and have counselled
the chief of the Achaeans not without discretion; nevertheless I am
older than you and I will tell you every" thing; therefore let no
man, not even King Agamemnon, disregard my saying, for he that foments
civil discord is a clanless, hearthless outlaw. 

"Now, however, let us obey the behests of night and get our suppers,
but let the sentinels every man of them camp by the trench that is
without the wall. I am giving these instructions to the young men;
when they have been attended to, do you, son of Atreus, give your
orders, for you are the most royal among us all. Prepare a feast for
your councillors; it is right and reasonable that you should do so;
there is abundance of wine in your tents, which the ships of the Achaeans
bring from Thrace daily. You have everything at your disposal wherewith
to entertain guests, and you have many subjects. When many are got
together, you can be guided by him whose counsel is wisest- and sorely
do we need shrewd and prudent counsel, for the foe has lit his watchfires
hard by our ships. Who can be other than dismayed? This night will
either be the ruin of our host, or save it." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The sentinels
went out in their armour under command of Nestor's son Thrasymedes,
a captain of the host, and of the bold warriors Ascalaphus and Ialmenus:
there were also Meriones, Aphareus and Deipyrus, and the son of Creion,
noble Lycomedes. There were seven captains of the sentinels, and with
each there went a hundred youths armed with long spears: they took
their places midway between the trench and the wall, and when they
had done so they lit their fires and got every man his supper.

The son of Atreus then bade many councillors of the Achaeans to his
quarters prepared a great feast in their honour. They laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had
enough to eat and drink, old Nestor, whose counsel was ever truest,
was the first to lay his mind before them. He, therefore, with all
sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus. 

"With yourself, most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,
will I both begin my speech and end it, for you are king over much
people. Jove, moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the sceptre and
to uphold righteousness, that you may take thought for your people
under you; therefore it behooves you above all others both to speak
and to give ear, and to out the counsel of another who shall have
been minded to speak wisely. All turns on you and on your commands,
therefore I will say what I think will be best. No man will be of
a truer mind than that which has been mine from the hour when you,
sir, angered Achilles by taking the girl Briseis from his tent against
my judgment. I urged you not to do so, but you yielded to your own
pride, and dishonoured a hero whom heaven itself had honoured- for
you still hold the prize that had been awarded to him. Now, however,
let us think how we may appease him, both with presents and fair speeches
that may conciliate him." 

And King Agamemnon answered, "Sir, you have reproved my folly justly.
I was wrong. I own it. One whom heaven befriends is in himself a host,
and Jove has shown that he befriends this man by destroying much people
of the Achaeans. I was blinded with passion and yielded to my worser
mind; therefore I will make amends, and will give him great gifts
by way of atonement. I will tell them in the presence of you all.
I will give him seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire,
and ten talents of gold. I will give him twenty iron cauldrons and
twelve strong horses that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich,
indeed, both in land and gold is he that has as many prizes as my
horses have won me. I will give him seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians,
whom I chose for myself when he took Lesbos- all of surpassing beauty.
I will give him these, and with them her whom I erewhile took from
him, the daughter of Briseus; and I swear a great oath that I never
went up into her couch, nor have been with her after the manner of
men and women. 

"All these things will I give him now down, and if hereafter the gods
vouchsafe me to sack the city of Priam, let him come when we Achaeans
are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to
his liking; furthermore let him take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest
after Helen herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest
of all lands, he shall be my son-in-law and I will show him like honour
with my own dear son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance.
I have three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and lphianassa, let
him take the one of his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing,
to the house of Peleus; I will add such dower to boot as no man ever
yet gave his daughter, and will give him seven well established cities,
Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire, where there is grass; holy Pherae and
the rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of
Pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy Pylos. The
men that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour
him with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient to his comfortable
ordinances. All this will I do if he will now forgo his anger. Let
him then yieldit is only Hades who is utterly ruthless and unyielding-
and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to mankind. Moreover
I am older and more royal than himself. Therefore, let him now obey
me." 

Then Nestor answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon.
The gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send chosen messengers,
who may go to the tent of Achilles son of Peleus without delay. Let
those go whom I shall name. Let Phoenix, dear to Jove, lead the way;
let Ajax and Ulysses follow, and let the heralds Odius and Eurybates
go with them. Now bring water for our hands, and bid all keep silence
while we pray to Jove the son of Saturn, if so be that he may have
mercy upon us." 

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. Men-servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings,
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from
the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus; and Nestor, looking first to
one and then to another, but most especially at Ulysses, was instant
with them that they should prevail with the noble son of Peleus.

They went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed earnestly
to earth-encircling Neptune that the high spirit of the son of Aeacus
might incline favourably towards them. When they reached the ships
and tents of the Myrmidons, they found Achilles playing on a lyre,
fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. It
was part of the spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city
of Eetion, and he was now diverting himself with it and singing the
feats of heroes. He was alone with Patroclus, who sat opposite to
him and said nothing, waiting till he should cease singing. Ulysses
and Ajax now came in- Ulysses leading the way -and stood before him.
Achilles sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his hand, and
Patroclus, when he saw the strangers, rose also. Achilles then greeted
them saying, "All hail and welcome- you must come upon some great
matter, you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the Achaeans."

With this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats covered
with purple rugs; then he said to Patroclus who was close by him,
"Son of Menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water
with the wine, and give every man his cup, for these are very dear
friends, who are now under my roof." 

Patroclus did as his comrade bade him; he set the chopping-block in
front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the loin
also of a goat, and the chine of a fat hog. Automedon held the meat
while Achilles chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and put them
on spits while the son of Menoetius made the fire burn high. When
the flame had died down, he spread the embers, laid the spits on top
of them, lifting them up and setting them upon the spit-racks; and
he sprinkled them with salt. When the meat was roasted, he set it
on platters, and handed bread round the table in fair baskets, while
Achilles dealt them their portions. Then Achilles took his seat facing
Ulysses against the opposite wall, and bade his comrade Patroclus
offer sacrifice to the gods; so he cast the offerings into the fire,
and they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Ajax made a sign
to Phoenix, and when he saw this, Ulysses filled his cup with wine
and pledged Achilles. 

"Hail," said he, "Achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer, neither
in the tent of Agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat
and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. Sir, we are
in the face of great disaster, and without your help know not whether
we shall save our fleet or lose it. The Trojans and their allies have
camped hard by our ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires
throughout their host and deem that nothing can now prevent them from
falling on our fleet. Jove, moreover, has sent his lightnings on their
right; Hector, in all his glory, rages like a maniac; confident that
Jove is with him he fears neither god nor man, but is gone raving
mad, and prays for the approach of day. He vows that he will hew the
high sterns of our ships in pieces, set fire to their hulls, and make
havoc of the Achaeans while they are dazed and smothered in smoke;
I much fear that heaven will make good his boasting, and it will prove
our lot to perish at Troy far from our home in Argos. Up, then, and
late though it be, save the sons of the Achaeans who faint before
the fury of the Trojans. You will repent bitterly hereafter if you
do not, for when the harm is done there will be no curing it; consider
ere it be too late, and save the Danaans from destruction.

"My good friend, when your father Peleus sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon,
did he not charge you saying, 'Son, Minerva and Juno will make you
strong if they choose, but check your high temper, for the better
part is in goodwill. Eschew vain quarrelling, and the Achaeans old
and young will respect you more for doing so.' These were his words,
but you have forgotten them. Even now, however, be appeased, and put
away your anger from you. Agamemnon will make you great amends if
you will forgive him; listen, and I will tell you what he has said
in his tent that he will give you. He will give you seven tripods
that have never yet been on the fire, and ten talents of gold; twenty
iron cauldrons, and twelve strong horses that have won races and carried
off prizes. Rich indeed both in land and gold is he who has as many
prizes as these horses have won for Agamemnon. Moreover he will give
you seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom he chose for himself,
when you took Lesbos- all of surpassing beauty. He will give you these,
and with them her whom he erewhile took from you, the daughter of
Briseus, and he will swear a great oath, he has never gone up into
her couch nor been with her after the manner of men and women. All
these things will he give you now down, and if hereafter the gods
vouchsafe him to sack the city of Priam, you can come when we Achaeans
are dividing the spoil, and load your ship with gold and bronze to
your liking. You can take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest after
Helen herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all
lands, you shall be his son-in-law, and he will show you like honour
with his own dear son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance.
Agamemnon has three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa;
you may take the one of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing,
to the house of Peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever
yet gave his daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities,
Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire where there is grass; holy Pheras and the
rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasus,
all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy Pylos. The men that
dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour you with
gifts as though were a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances.
All this will he do if you will now forgo your anger. Moreover, though
you hate both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the
rest of the Achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they
will honour you as a god, and you will earn great glory at their hands.
You might even kill Hector; he will come within your reach, for he
is infatuated, and declares that not a Danaan whom the ships have
brought can hold his own against him." 

Achilles answered, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, I should give you
formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no
more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. Him do
I hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides
another in his heart; therefore I will say what I mean. I will be
appeased neither by Agamemnon son of Atreus nor by any other of the
Danaans, for I see that I have no thanks for all my fighting. He that
fights fares no better than he that does not; coward and hero are
held in equal honour, and death deals like measure to him who works
and him who is idle. I have taken nothing by all my hardships- with
my life ever in my hand; as a bird when she has found a morsel takes
it to her nestlings, and herself fares hardly, even so man a long
night have I been wakeful, and many a bloody battle have I waged by
day against those who were fighting for their women. With my ships
I have taken twelve cities, and eleven round about Troy have I stormed
with my men by land; I took great store of wealth from every one of
them, but I gave all up to Agamemnon son of Atreus. He stayed where
he was by his ships, yet of what came to him he gave little, and kept
much himself. 

"Nevertheless he did distribute some meeds of honour among the chieftains
and kings, and these have them still; from me alone of the Achaeans
did he take the woman in whom I delighted- let him keep her and sleep
with her. Why, pray, must the Argives needs fight the Trojans? What
made the son of Atreus gather the host and bring them? Was it not
for the sake of Helen? Are the sons of Atreus the only men in the
world who love their wives? Any man of common right feeling will love
and cherish her who is his own, as I this woman, with my whole heart,
though she was but a fruitling of my spear. Agamemnon has taken her
from me; he has played me false; I know him; let him tempt me no further,
for he shall not move me. Let him look to you, Ulysses, and to the
other princes to save his ships from burning. He has done much without
me already. He has built a wall; he has dug a trench deep and wide
all round it, and he has planted it within with stakes; but even so
he stays not the murderous might of Hector. So long as I fought the
Achaeans Hector suffered not the battle range far from the city walls;
he would come to the Scaean gates and to the oak tree, but no further.
Once he stayed to meet me and hardly did he escape my onset: now,
however, since I am in no mood to fight him, I will to-morrow offer
sacrifice to Jove and to all the gods; I will draw my ships into the
water and then victual them duly; to-morrow morning, if you care to
look, you will see my ships on the Hellespont, and my men rowing out
to sea with might and main. If great Neptune vouchsafes me a fair
passage, in three days I shall be in Phthia. I have much there that
I left behind me when I came here to my sorrow, and I shall bring
back still further store of gold, of red copper, of fair women, and
of iron, my share of the spoils that we have taken; but one prize,
he who gave has insolently taken away. Tell him all as I now bid you,
and tell him in public that the Achaeans may hate him and beware of
him should he think that he can yet dupe others for his effrontery
never fails him. 

"As for me, hound that he is, he dares not look me in the face. I
will take no counsel with him, and will undertake nothing in common
with him. He has wronged me and deceived me enough, he shall not cozen
me further; let him go his own way, for Jove has robbed him of his
reason. I loathe his presents, and for himself care not one straw.
He may offer me ten or even twenty times what he has now done, nay-
not though it be all that he has in the world, both now or ever shall
have; he may promise me the wealth of Orchomenus or of Egyptian Thebes,
which is the richest city in the whole world, for it has a hundred
gates through each of which two hundred men may drive at once with
their chariots and horses; he may offer me gifts as the sands of the
sea or the dust of the plain in multitude, but even so he shall not
move me till I have been revenged in full for the bitter wrong he
has done me. I will not marry his daughter; she may be fair as Venus,
and skilful as Minerva, but I will have none of her: let another take
her, who may be a good match for her and who rules a larger kingdom.
If the gods spare me to return home, Peleus will find me a wife; there
are Achaean women in Hellas and Phthia, daughters of kings that have
cities under them; of these I can take whom I will and marry her.
Many a time was I minded when at home in Phthia to woo and wed a woman
who would make me a suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old
father Peleus. My life is more to me than all the wealth of Ilius
while it was yet at peace before the Achaeans went there, or than
all the treasure that lies on the stone floor of Apollo's temple beneath
the cliffs of Pytho. Cattle and sheep are to be had for harrying,
and a man buy both tripods and horses if he wants them, but when his
life has once left him it can neither be bought nor harried back again.

"My mother Thetis tells me that there are two ways in which I may
meet my end. If I stay here and fight, I shall not return alive but
my name will live for ever: whereas if I go home my name will die,
but it will be long ere death shall take me. To the rest of you, then,
I say, 'Go home, for you will not take Ilius.' Jove has held his hand
over her to protect her, and her people have taken heart. Go, therefore,
as in duty bound, and tell the princes of the Achaeans the message
that I have sent them; tell them to find some other plan for the saving
of their ships and people, for so long as my displeasure lasts the
one that they have now hit upon may not be. As for Phoenix, let him
sleep here that he may sail with me in the morning if he so will.
But I will not take him by force." 

They all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which he
had denied them, till presently the old knight Phoenix in his great
fear for the ships of the Achaeans, burst into tears and said, "Noble
Achilles, if you are now minded to return, and in the fierceness of
your anger will do nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my
son, can I remain here without you? Your father Peleus bade me go
with you when he sent you as a mere lad from Phthia to Agamemnon.
You knew nothing neither of war nor of the arts whereby men make their
mark in council, and he sent me with you to train you in all excellence
of speech and action. Therefore, my son, I will not stay here without
you- no, not though heaven itself vouchsafe to strip my years from
off me, and make me young as I was when I first left Hellas the land
of fair women. I was then flying the anger of father Amyntor, son
of Ormenus, who was furious with me in the matter of his concubine,
of whom he was enamoured to the wronging of his wife my mother. My
mother, therefore, prayed me without ceasing to lie with the woman
myself, that so she hate my father, and in the course of time I yielded.
But my father soon came to know, and cursed me bitterly, calling the
dread Erinyes to witness. He prayed that no son of mine might ever
sit upon knees- and the gods, Jove of the world below and awful Proserpine,
fulfilled his curse. I took counsel to kill him, but some god stayed
my rashness and bade me think on men's evil tongues and how I should
be branded as the murderer of my father: nevertheless I could not
bear to stay in my father's house with him so bitter a against me.
My cousins and clansmen came about me, and pressed me sorely to remain;
many a sheep and many an ox did they slaughter, and many a fat hog
did they set down to roast before the fire; many a jar, too, did they
broach of my father's wine. Nine whole nights did they set a guard
over me taking it in turns to watch, and they kept a fire always burning,
both in the cloister of the outer court and in the inner court at
the doors of the room wherein I lay; but when the darkness of the
tenth night came, I broke through the closed doors of my room, and
climbed the wall of the outer court after passing quickly and unperceived
through the men on guard and the women servants. I then fled through
Hellas till I came to fertile Phthia, mother of sheep, and to King
Peleus, who made me welcome and treated me as a father treats an only
son who will be heir to all his wealth. He made me rich and set me
over much people, establishing me on the borders of Phthia where I
was chief ruler over the Dolopians. 

"It was I, Achilles, who had the making of you; I loved you with all
my heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you had gone
out elsewhere, till I had first set you upon my knees, cut up the
dainty morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup to your
lips. Many a time have you slobbered your wine in baby helplessness
over my shirt; I had infinite trouble with you, but I knew that heaven
had vouchsafed me no offspring of my own, and I made a son of you,
Achilles, that in my hour of need you might protect me. Now, therefore,
I say battle with your pride and beat it; cherish not your anger for
ever; the might and majesty of heaven are more than ours, but even
heaven may be appeased; and if a man has sinned he prays the gods,
and reconciles them to himself by his piteous cries and by frankincense,
with drink-offerings and the savour of burnt sacrifice. For prayers
are as daughters to great Jove; halt, wrinkled, with eyes askance,
they follow in the footsteps of sin, who, being fierce and fleet of
foot, leaves them far behind him, and ever baneful to mankind outstrips
them even to the ends of the world; but nevertheless the prayers come
hobbling and healing after. If a man has pity upon these daughters
of Jove when they draw near him, they will bless him and hear him
too when he is praying; but if he deny them and will not listen to
them, they go to Jove the son of Saturn and pray that he may presently
fall into sin- to his ruing bitterly hereafter. Therefore, Achilles,
give these daughters of Jove due reverence, and bow before them as
all good men will bow. Were not the son of Atreus offering you gifts
and promising others later- if he were still furious and implacable-
I am not he that would bid you throw off your anger and help the Achaeans,
no matter how great their need; but he is giving much now, and more
hereafter; he has sent his captains to urge his suit, and has chosen
those who of all the Argives are most acceptable to you; make not
then their words and their coming to be of none effect. Your anger
has been righteous so far. We have heard in song how heroes of old
time quarrelled when they were roused to fury, but still they could
be won by gifts, and fair words could soothe them. 

"I have an old story in my mind- a very old one- but you are all friends
and I will tell it. The Curetes and the Aetolians were fighting and
killing one another round Calydon- the Aetolians defending the city
and the Curetes trying to destroy it. For Diana of the golden throne
was angry and did them hurt because Oeneus had not offered her his
harvest first-fruits. The other gods had all been feasted with hecatombs,
but to the daughter of great Jove alone he had made no sacrifice.
He had forgotten her, or somehow or other it had escaped him, and
this was a grievous sin. Thereon the archer goddess in her displeasure
sent a prodigious creature against him- a savage wild boar with great
white tusks that did much harm to his orchard lands, uprooting apple-trees
in full bloom and throwing them to the ground. But Meleager son of
Oeneus got huntsmen and hounds from many cities and killed it- for
it was so monstrous that not a few were needed, and many a man did
it stretch upon his funeral pyre. On this the goddess set the Curetes
and the Aetolians fighting furiously about the head and skin of the
boar. 

"So long as Meleager was in the field things went badly with the Curetes,
and for all their numbers they could not hold their ground under the
city walls; but in the course of time Meleager was angered as even
a wise man will sometimes be. He was incensed with his mother Althaea,
and therefore stayed at home with his wedded wife fair Cleopatra,
who was daughter of Marpessa daughter of Euenus, and of Ides the man
then living. He it was who took his bow and faced King Apollo himself
for fair Marpessa's sake; her father and mother then named her Alcyone,
because her mother had mourned with the plaintive strains of the halcyon-bird
when Phoebus Apollo had carried her off. Meleager, then, stayed at
home with Cleopatra, nursing the anger which he felt by reason of
his mother's curses. His mother, grieving for the death of her brother,
prayed the gods, and beat the earth with her hands, calling upon Hades
and on awful Proserpine; she went down upon her knees and her bosom
was wet with tears as she prayed that they would kill her son- and
Erinys that walks in darkness and knows no ruth heard her from Erebus.

"Then was heard the din of battle about the gates of Calydon, and
the dull thump of the battering against their walls. Thereon the elders
of the Aetolians besought Meleager; they sent the chiefest of their
priests, and begged him to come out and help them, promising him a
great reward. They bade him choose fifty plough-gates, the most fertile
in the plain of Calydon, the one-half vineyard and the other open
plough-land. The old warrior Oeneus implored him, standing at the
threshold of his room and beating the doors in supplication. His sisters
and his mother herself besought him sore, but he the more refused
them; those of his comrades who were nearest and dearest to him also
prayed him, but they could not move him till the foe was battering
at the very doors of his chamber, and the Curetes had scaled the walls
and were setting fire to the city. Then at last his sorrowing wife
detailed the horrors that befall those whose city is taken; she reminded
him how the men are slain, and the city is given over to the flames,
while the women and children are carried into captivity; when he heard
all this, his heart was touched, and he donned his armour to go forth.
Thus of his own inward motion he saved the city of the Aetolians;
but they now gave him nothing of those rich rewards that they had
offered earlier, and though he saved the city he took nothing by it.
Be not then, my son, thus minded; let not heaven lure you into any
such course. When the ships are burning it will be a harder matter
to save them. Take the gifts, and go, for the Achaeans will then honour
you as a god; whereas if you fight without taking them, you may beat
the battle back, but you will not be held in like honour."

And Achilles answered, "Phoenix, old friend and father, I have no
need of such honour. I have honour from Jove himself, which will abide
with me at my ships while I have breath in my body, and my limbs are
strong. I say further- and lay my saying to your heart- vex me no
more with this weeping and lamentation, all in the cause of the son
of Atreus. Love him so well, and you may lose the love I bear you.
You ought to help me rather in troubling those that trouble me; be
king as much as I am, and share like honour with myself; the others
shall take my answer; stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in
your bed; at daybreak we will consider whether to remain or go."

On this she nodded quietly to Patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare
a bed for Phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. Ajax
son of Telamon then said, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, let us be
gone, for I see that our journey is vain. We must now take our answer,
unwelcome though it be, to the Danaans who are waiting to receive
it. Achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing
for the love his comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others.
He is implacable- and yet if a man's brother or son has been slain
he will accept a fine by way of amends from him that killed him, and
the wrong-doer having paid in full remains in peace among his own
people; but as for you, Achilles, the gods have put a wicked unforgiving
spirit in your heart, and this, all about one single girl, whereas
we now offer you the seven best we have, and much else into the bargain.
Be then of a more gracious mind, respect the hospitality of your own
roof. We are with you as messengers from the host of the Danaans,
and would fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the
Achaeans." 

"Ajax," replied Achilles, "noble son of Telamon, you have spoken much
to my liking, but my blood boils when I think it all over, and remember
how the son of Atreus treated me with contumely as though I were some
vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the Argives. Go, then,
and deliver your message; say that I will have no concern with fighting
till Hector, son of noble Priam, reaches the tents of the Myrmidons
in his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. For all
his lust of battle, I take it he will be held in check when he is
at my own tent and ship." 

On this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, Ulysses leading the way. But Patroclus
told his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed
for Phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet
of fine linen. The old man then laid himself down and waited till
morning came. But Achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him
the daughter of Phorbas lovely Diomede, whom he had carried off from
Lesbos. Patroclus lay on the other side of the room, and with him
fair Iphis whom Achilles had given him when he took Scyros the city
of Enyeus. 

When the envoys reached the tents of the son of Atreus, the Achaeans
rose, pledged them in cups of gold, and began to question them. King
Agamemnon was the first to do so. Tell me, Ulysses," said he, "will
he save the ships from burning, or did be refuse, and is he still
furious?" 

Ulysses answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,
Achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely angry than ever,
and spurns both you and your gifts. He bids you take counsel with
the Achaeans to save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself,
he said that at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water.
He said further that he should advise every one to sail home likewise,
for that you will not reach the goal of Ilius. 'Jove,' he said, 'has
laid his hand over the city to protect it, and the people have taken
heart.' This is what he said, and the others who were with me can
tell you the same story- Ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them,
who may be trusted. The old man Phoenix stayed where he was to sleep,
for so Achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the
morning if he so would; but he will not take him by force."

They all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected,
by reason of the sternness with which Achilles had refused them, till
presently Diomed said, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,
you ought not to have sued the son of Peleus nor offered him gifts.
He is proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged him in his pride
am further. Let him stay or go as he will. He will fight later when
he is in the humour, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say; we have eaten and drunk our fill,
let us then take our rest, for in rest there is both strength and
stay. But when fair rosy-fingered morn appears, forthwith bring out
your host and your horsemen in front of the ships, urging them on,
and yourself fighting among the foremost." 

Thus he spoke, and the other chieftains approved his words. They then
made their drink-offerings and went every man to his own tent, where
they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK X

Now the other princes of the Achaeans slept soundly the whole night
through, but Agamemnon son of Atreus was troubled, so that he could
get no rest. As when fair Juno's lord flashes his lightning in token
of great rain or hail or snow when the snow-flakes whiten the ground,
or again as a sign that he will open the wide jaws of hungry war,
even so did Agamemnon heave many a heavy sigh, for his soul trembled
within him. When he looked upon the plain of Troy he marvelled at
the many watchfires burning in front of Ilius, and at the sound of
pipes and flutes and of the hum of men, but when presently he turned
towards the ships and hosts of the Achaeans, he tore his hair by handfuls
before Jove on high, and groaned aloud for the very disquietness of
his soul. In the end he deemed it best to go at once to Nestor son
of Neleus, and see if between them they could find any way of the
Achaeans from destruction. He therefore rose, put on his shirt, bound
his sandals about his comely feet, flung the skin of a huge tawny
lion over his shoulders- a skin that reached his feet- and took his
spear in his hand. 

Neither could Menelaus sleep, for he, too, boded ill for the Argives
who for his sake had sailed from far over the seas to fight the Trojans.
He covered his broad back with the skin of a spotted panther, put
a casque of bronze upon his head, and took his spear in his brawny
hand. Then he went to rouse his brother, who was by far the most powerful
of the Achaeans, and was honoured by the people as though he were
a god. He found him by the stern of his ship already putting his goodly
array about his shoulders, and right glad was he that his brother
had come. 

Menelaus spoke first. "Why," said he, "my dear brother, are you thus
arming? Are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit the Trojans?
I greatly fear that no one will do you this service, and spy upon
the enemy alone in the dead of night. It will be a deed of great daring."

And King Agamemnon answered, "Menelaus, we both of us need shrewd
counsel to save the Argives and our ships, for Jove has changed his
mind, and inclines towards Hector's sacrifices rather than ours. I
never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in
one day as Hector has now wrought against the sons of the Achaeans-
and that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god
nor goddess. The Argives will rue it long and deeply. Run, therefore,
with all speed by the line of the ships, and call Ajax and Idomeneus.
Meanwhile I will go to Nestor, and bid him rise and go about among
the companies of our sentinels to give them their instructions; they
will listen to him sooner than to any man, for his own son, and Meriones
brother in arms to Idomeneus, are captains over them. It was to them
more particularly that we gave this charge." 

Menelaus replied, "How do I take your meaning? Am I to stay with them
and wait your coming, or shall I return here as soon as I have given
your orders?" "Wait," answered King Agamemnon, "for there are so many
paths about the camp that we might miss one another. Call every man
on your way, and bid him be stirring; name him by his lineage and
by his father's name, give each all titular observance, and stand
not too much upon your own dignity; we must take our full share of
toil, for at our birth Jove laid this heavy burden upon us."

With these instructions he sent his brother on his way, and went on
to Nestor shepherd of his people. He found him sleeping in his tent
hard by his own ship; his goodly armour lay beside him- his shield,
his two spears and his helmet; beside him also lay the gleaming girdle
with which the old man girded himself when he armed to lead his people
into battle- for his age stayed him not. He raised himself on his
elbow and looked up at Agamemnon. "Who is it," said he, "that goes
thus about the host and the ships alone and in the dead of night,
when men are sleeping? Are you looking for one of your mules or for
some comrade? Do not stand there and say nothing, but speak. What
is your business?" 

And Agamemnon answered, "Nestor, son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean
name, it is I, Agamemnon son of Atreus, on whom Jove has laid labour
and sorrow so long as there is breath in my body and my limbs carry
me. I am thus abroad because sleep sits not upon my eyelids, but my
heart is big with war and with the jeopardy of the Achaeans. I am
in great fear for the Danaans. I am at sea, and without sure counsel;
my heart beats as though it would leap out of my body, and my limbs
fail me. If then you can do anything- for you too cannot sleep- let
us go the round of the watch, and see whether they are drowsy with
toil and sleeping to the neglect of their duty. The enemy is encamped
hard and we know not but he may attack us by night." 

Nestor replied, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,
Jove will not do all for Hector that Hector thinks he will; he will
have troubles yet in plenty if Achilles will lay aside his anger.
I will go with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of Tydeus,
or Ulysses, or fleet Ajax and the valiant son of Phyleus. Some one
had also better go and call Ajax and King Idomeneus, for their ships
are not near at hand but the farthest of all. I cannot however refrain
from blaming Menelaus, much as I love him and respect him- and I will
say so plainly, even at the risk of offending you- for sleeping and
leaving all this trouble to yourself. He ought to be going about imploring
aid from all the princes of the Achaeans, for we are in extreme danger."

And Agamemnon answered, "Sir, you may sometimes blame him justly,
for he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself- not indeed
from sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and expects
me to take the lead. On this occasion, however, he was awake before
I was, and came to me of his own accord. I have already sent him to
call the very men whom you have named. And now let us be going. We
shall find them with the watch outside the gates, for it was there
I said that we would meet them." 

"In that case," answered Nestor, "the Argives will not blame him nor
disobey his orders when he urges them to fight or gives them instructions."

With this he put on his shirt, and bound his sandals about his comely
feet. He buckled on his purple coat, of two thicknesses, large, and
of a rough shaggy texture, grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear,
and wended his way along the line of the Achaean ships. First he called
loudly to Ulysses peer of gods in counsel and woke him, for he was
soon roused by the sound of the battle-cry. He came outside his tent
and said, "Why do you go thus alone about the host, and along the
line of the ships in the stillness of the night? What is it that you
find so urgent?" And Nestor knight of Gerene answered, "Ulysses, noble
son of Laertes, take it not amiss, for the Achaeans are in great straits.
Come with me and let us wake some other, who may advise well with
us whether we shall fight or fly." 

On this Ulysses went at once into his tent, put his shield about his
shoulders and came out with them. First they went to Diomed son of
Tydeus, and found him outside his tent clad in his armour with his
comrades sleeping round him and using their shields as pillows; as
for their spears, they stood upright on the spikes of their butts
that were driven into the ground, and the burnished bronze flashed
afar like the lightning of father Jove. The hero was sleeping upon
the skin of an ox, with a piece of fine carpet under his head; Nestor
went up to him and stirred him with his heel to rouse him, upbraiding
him and urging him to bestir himself. "Wake up," he exclaimed, "son
of Tydeus. How can you sleep on in this way? Can you not see that
the Trojans are encamped on the brow of the plain hard by our ships,
with but a little space between us and them?" 

On these words Diomed leaped up instantly and said, "Old man, your
heart is of iron; you rest not one moment from your labours. Are there
no younger men among the Achaeans who could go about to rouse the
princes? There is no tiring you." 

And Nestor knight of Gerene made answer, "My son, all that you have
said is true. I have good sons, and also much people who might call
the chieftains, but the Achaeans are in the gravest danger; life and
death are balanced as it were on the edge of a razor. Go then, for
you are younger than I, and of your courtesy rouse Ajax and the fleet
son of Phyleus." 

Diomed threw the skin of a great tawny lion about his shoulders- a
skin that reached his feet- and grasped his spear. When he had roused
the heroes, he brought them back with him; they then went the round
of those who were on guard, and found the captains not sleeping at
their posts but wakeful and sitting with their arms about them. As
sheep dogs that watch their flocks when they are yarded, and hear
a wild beast coming through the mountain forest towards them- forthwith
there is a hue and cry of dogs and men, and slumber is broken- even
so was sleep chased from the eyes of the Achaeans as they kept the
watches of the wicked night, for they turned constantly towards the
plain whenever they heard any stir among the Trojans. The old man
was glad bade them be of good cheer. "Watch on, my children," said
he, "and let not sleep get hold upon you, lest our enemies triumph
over us." 

With this he passed the trench, and with him the other chiefs of the
Achaeans who had been called to the council. Meriones and the brave
son of Nestor went also, for the princes bade them. When they were
beyond the trench that was dug round the wall they held their meeting
on the open ground where there was a space clear of corpses, for it
was here that when night fell Hector had turned back from his onslaught
on the Argives. They sat down, therefore, and held debate with one
another. 

Nestor spoke first. "My friends," said he, "is there any man bold
enough to venture the Trojans, and cut off some straggler, or us news
of what the enemy mean to do whether they will stay here by the ships
away from the city, or whether, now that they have worsted the Achaeans,
they will retire within their walls. If he could learn all this and
come back safely here, his fame would be high as heaven in the mouths
of all men, and he would be rewarded richly; for the chiefs from all
our ships would each of them give him a black ewe with her lamb- which
is a present of surpassing value- and he would be asked as a guest
to all feasts and clan-gatherings." 

They all held their peace, but Diomed of the loud war-cry spoke saying,
"Nestor, gladly will I visit the host of the Trojans over against
us, but if another will go with me I shall do so in greater confidence
and comfort. When two men are together, one of them may see some opportunity
which the other has not caught sight of; if a man is alone he is less
full of resource, and his wit is weaker." 

On this several offered to go with Diomed. The two Ajaxes, servants
of Mars, Meriones, and the son of Nestor all wanted to go, so did
Menelaus son of Atreus; Ulysses also wished to go among the host of
the Trojans, for he was ever full of daring, and thereon Agamemnon
king of men spoke thus: "Diomed," said he, "son of Tydeus, man after
my own heart, choose your comrade for yourself- take the best man
of those that have offered, for many would now go with you. Do not
through delicacy reject the better man, and take the worst out of
respect for his lineage, because he is of more royal blood."

He said this because he feared for Menelaus. Diomed answered, "If
you bid me take the man of my own choice, how in that case can I fail
to think of Ulysses, than whom there is no man more eager to face
all kinds of danger- and Pallas Minerva loves him well? If he were
to go with me we should pass safely through fire itself, for he is
quick to see and understand." 

"Son of Tydeus," replied Ulysses, "say neither good nor ill about
me, for you are among Argives who know me well. Let us be going, for
the night wanes and dawn is at hand. The stars have gone forward,
two-thirds of the night are already spent, and the third is alone
left us." 

They then put on their armour. Brave Thrasymedes provided the son
of Tydeus with a sword and a shield (for he had left his own at his
ship) and on his head he set a helmet of bull's hide without either
peak or crest; it is called a skull-cap and is a common headgear.
Meriones found a bow and quiver for Ulysses, and on his head he set
a leathern helmet that was lined with a strong plaiting of leathern
thongs, while on the outside it was thickly studded with boar's teeth,
well and skilfully set into it; next the head there was an inner lining
of felt. This helmet had been stolen by Autolycus out of Eleon when
he broke into the house of Amyntor son of Ormenus. He gave it to Amphidamas
of Cythera to take to Scandea, and Amphidamas gave it as a guest-gift
to Molus, who gave it to his son Meriones; and now it was set upon
the head of Ulysses. 

When the pair had armed, they set out, and left the other chieftains
behind them. Pallas Minerva sent them a heron by the wayside upon
their right hands; they could not see it for the darkness, but they
heard its cry. Ulysses was glad when he heard it and prayed to Minerva:
"Hear me," he cried, "daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, you who spy
out all my ways and who are with me in all my hardships; befriend
me in this mine hour, and grant that we may return to the ships covered
with glory after having achieved some mighty exploit that shall bring
sorrow to the Trojans." 

Then Diomed of the loud war-cry also prayed: "Hear me too," said he,
"daughter of Jove, unweariable; be with me even as you were with my
noble father Tydeus when he went to Thebes as envoy sent by the Achaeans.
He left the Achaeans by the banks of the river Aesopus, and went to
the city bearing a message of peace to the Cadmeians; on his return
thence, with your help, goddess, he did great deeds of daring, for
you were his ready helper. Even so guide me and guard me now, and
in return I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a
year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke. I
will gild her horns and will offer her up to you in sacrifice."

Thus they prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard their prayer. When they
had done praying to the daughter of great Jove, they went their way
like two lions prowling by night amid the armour and blood-stained
bodies of them that had fallen. 

Neither again did Hector let the Trojans sleep; for he too called
the princes and councillors of the Trojans that he might set his counsel
before them. "Is there one," said he, "who for a great reward will
do me the service of which I will tell you? He shall be well paid
if he will. I will give him a chariot and a couple of horses, the
fleetest that can be found at the ships of the Achaeans, if he will
dare this thing; and he will win infinite honour to boot; he must
go to the ships and find out whether they are still guarded as heretofore,
or whether now that we have beaten them the Achaeans design to fly,
and through sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches."

They all held their peace; but there was among the Trojans a certain
man named Dolon, son of Eumedes, the famous herald- a man rich in
gold and bronze. He was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an
only son among five sisters. He it was that now addressed the Trojans.
"I, Hector," said he, "Will to the ships and will exploit them. But
first hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot,
bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of
Peleus. I will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. I will
go through the host from one end to the other till I come to the ship
of Agamemnon, where I take it the princes of the Achaeans are now
consulting whether they shall fight or fly." 

When he had done speaking Hector held up his sceptre, and swore him
his oath saying, "May Jove the thundering husband of Juno bear witness
that no other Trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that
you shall have your will with them for ever." 

The oath he swore was bootless, but it made Dolon more keen on going.
He hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he wore the skin
of a grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of ferret skin. Then
he took a pointed javelin, and left the camp for the ships, but he
was not to return with any news for Hector. When he had left the horses
and the troops behind him, he made all speed on his way, but Ulysses
perceived his coming and said to Diomed, "Diomed, here is some one
from the camp; I am not sure whether he is a spy, or whether it is
some thief who would plunder the bodies of the dead; let him get a
little past us, we can then spring upon him and take him. If, however,
he is too quick for us, go after him with your spear and hem him in
towards the ships away from the Trojan camp, to prevent his getting
back to the town." 

With this they turned out of their way and lay down among the corpses.
Dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when he had got
about as far as the distance by which a mule-plowed furrow exceeds
one that has been ploughed by oxen (for mules can plow fallow land
quicker than oxen) they ran after him, and when he heard their footsteps
he stood still, for he made sure they were friends from the Trojan
camp come by Hector's orders to bid him return; when, however, they
were only a spear's cast, or less away form him, he saw that they
were enemies as fast as his legs could take him. The others gave chase
at once, and as a couple of well-trained hounds press forward after
a doe or hare that runs screaming in front of them, even so did the
son of Tydeus and Ulysses pursue Dolon and cut him off from his own
people. But when he had fled so far towards the ships that he would
soon have fallen in with the outposts, Minerva infused fresh strength
into the son of Tydeus for fear some other of the Achaeans might have
the glory of being first to hit him, and he might himself be only
second; he therefore sprang forward with his spear and said, "Stand,
or I shall throw my spear, and in that case I shall soon make an end
of you." 

He threw as he spoke, but missed his aim on purpose. The dart flew
over the man's right shoulder, and then stuck in the ground. He stood
stock still, trembling and in great fear; his teeth chattered, and
he turned pale with fear. The two came breathless up to him and seized
his hands, whereon he began to weep and said, "Take me alive; I will
ransom myself; we have great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron,
and from this my father will satisfy you with a very large ransom,
should he hear of my being alive at the ships of the Achaeans."

"Fear not," replied Ulysses, "let no thought of death be in your mind;
but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone
in the dead of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while
other men are sleeping? Is it to plunder the bodies of the slain,
or did Hector send you to spy out what was going on at the ships?
Or did you come here of your own mere notion?" 

Dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: "Hector, with his
vain flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. He said
he would give me the horses of the noble son of Peleus and his bronze-bedizened
chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the flying night, get
close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships are still guarded
as heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten them, the Achaeans
design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep
their watches." 

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "You had indeed set your heart
upon a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of Aeacus are
hardly to be kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than Achilles
himself, whose mother was an immortal. But tell me, and tell me true,
where did you leave Hector when you started? Where lies his armour
and his horses? How, too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the
Trojans ordered? What are their plans? Will they stay here by the
ships and away from the city, or now that they have worsted the Achaeans,
will they retire within their walls?" 

And Dolon answered, "I will tell you truly all. Hector and the other
councillors are now holding conference by the monument of great Ilus,
away from the general tumult; as for the guards about which you ask
me, there is no chosen watch to keep guard over the host. The Trojans
have their watchfires, for they are bound to have them; they, therefore,
are awake and keep each other to their duty as sentinels; but the
allies who have come from other places are asleep and leave it to
the Trojans to keep guard, for their wives and children are not here."

Ulysses then said, "Now tell me; are they sleeping among the Trojan
troops, or do they lie apart? Explain this that I may understand it."

"I will tell you truly all," replied Dolon. "To the seaward lie the
Carians, the Paeonian bowmen, the Leleges, the Cauconians, and the
noble Pelasgi. The Lysians and proud Mysians, with the Phrygians and
Meonians, have their place on the side towards Thymbra; but why ask
about an this? If you want to find your way into the host of the Trojans,
there are the Thracians, who have lately come here and lie apart from
the others at the far end of the camp; and they have Rhesus son of
Eioneus for their king. His horses are the finest and strongest that
I have ever seen, they are whiter than snow and fleeter than any wind
that blows. His chariot is bedight with silver and gold, and he has
brought his marvellous golden armour, of the rarest workmanship- too
splendid for any mortal man to carry, and meet only for the gods.
Now, therefore, take me to the ships or bind me securely here, until
you come back and have proved my words whether they be false or true."

Diomed looked sternly at him and answered, "Think not, Dolon, for
all the good information you have given us, that you shall escape
now you are in our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you
will come some second time to the ships of the Achaeans either as
a spy or as an open enemy, but if I kill you and an end of you, you
will give no more trouble." 

On this Dolon would have caught him by the beard to beseech him further,
but Diomed struck him in the middle of his neck with his sword and
cut through both sinews so that his head fell rolling in the dust
while he was yet speaking. They took the ferret-skin cap from his
head, and also the wolf-skin, the bow, and his long spear. Ulysses
hung them up aloft in honour of Minerva the goddess of plunder, and
prayed saying, "Accept these, goddess, for we give them to you in
preference to all the gods in Olympus: therefore speed us still further
towards the horses and sleeping-ground of the Thracians."

With these words he took the spoils and set them upon a tamarisk tree,
and they marked the place by pulling up reeds and gathering boughs
of tamarisk that they might not miss it as they came back through
the' flying hours of darkness. The two then went onwards amid the
fallen armour and the blood, and came presently to the company of
Thracian soldiers, who were sleeping, tired out with their day's toil;
their goodly armour was lying on the ground beside them all orderly
in three rows, and each man had his yoke of horses beside him. Rhesus
was sleeping in the middle, and hard by him his horses were made fast
to the topmost rim of his chariot. Ulysses from some way off saw him
and said, "This, Diomed, is the man, and these are the horses about
which Dolon whom we killed told us. Do your very utmost; dally not
about your armour, but loose the horses at once- or else kill the
men yourself, while I see to the horses." 

Thereon Minerva put courage into the heart of Diomed, and he smote
them right and left. They made a hideous groaning as they were being
hacked about, and the earth was red with their blood. As a lion springs
furiously upon a flock of sheep or goats when he finds without their
shepherd, so did the son of Tydeus set upon the Thracian soldiers
till he had killed twelve. As he killed them Ulysses came and drew
them aside by their feet one by one, that the horses might go forward
freely without being frightened as they passed over the dead bodies,
for they were not yet used to them. When the son of Tydeus came to
the king, he killed him too (which made thirteen), as he was breathing
hard, for by the counsel of Minerva an evil dream, the seed of Oeneus,
hovered that night over his head. Meanwhile Ulysses untied the horses,
made them fast one to another and drove them off, striking them with
his bow, for he had forgotten to take the whip from the chariot. Then
he whistled as a sign to Diomed. 

But Diomed stayed where he was, thinking what other daring deed he
might accomplish. He was doubting whether to take the chariot in which
the king's armour was lying, and draw it out by the pole, or to lift
the armour out and carry it off; or whether again, he should not kill
some more Thracians. While he was thus hesitating Minerva came up
to him and said, "Get back, Diomed, to the ships or you may be driven
thither, should some other god rouse the Trojans." 

Diomed knew that it was the goddess, and at once sprang upon the horses.
Ulysses beat them with his bow and they flew onward to the ships of
the Achaeans. 

But Apollo kept no blind look-out when he saw Minerva with the son
of Tydeus. He was angry with her, and coming to the host of the Trojans
he roused Hippocoon, a counsellor of the Thracians and a noble kinsman
of Rhesus. He started up out of his sleep and saw that the horses
were no longer in their place, and that the men were gasping in their
death-agony; on this he groaned aloud, and called upon his friend
by name. Then the whole Trojan camp was in an uproar as the people
kept hurrying together, and they marvelled at the deeds of the heroes
who had now got away towards the ships. 

When they reached the place where they had killed Hector's scout,
Ulysses stayed his horses, and the son of Tydeus, leaping to the ground,
placed the blood-stained spoils in the hands of Ulysses and remounted:
then he lashed the horses onwards, and they flew forward nothing loth
towards the ships as though of their own free will. Nestor was first
to hear the tramp of their feet. "My friends," said he, "princes and
counsellors of the Argives, shall I guess right or wrong?- but I must
say what I think: there is a sound in my ears as of the tramp of horses.
I hope it may Diomed and Ulysses driving in horses from the Trojans,
but I much fear that the bravest of the Argives may have come to some
harm at their hands." 

He had hardly done speaking when the two men came in and dismounted,
whereon the others shook hands right gladly with them and congratulated
them. Nestor knight of Gerene was first to question them. "Tell me,"
said he, "renowned Ulysses, how did you two come by these horses?
Did you steal in among the Trojan forces, or did some god meet you
and give them to you? They are like sunbeams. I am well conversant
with the Trojans, for old warrior though I am I never hold back by
the ships, but I never yet saw or heard of such horses as these are.
Surely some god must have met you and given them to you, for you are
both of dear to Jove, and to Jove's daughter Minerva." 

And Ulysses answered, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean
name, heaven, if it so will, can give us even better horses than these,
for the gods are far mightier than we are. These horses, however,
about which you ask me, are freshly come from Thrace. Diomed killed
their king with the twelve bravest of his companions. Hard by the
ships we took a thirteenth man- a scout whom Hector and the other
Trojans had sent as a spy upon our ships." 

He laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while
the other Achaeans followed him gladly. When they reached the strongly
built quarters of the son of Tydeus, they tied the horses with thongs
of leather to the manger, where the steeds of Diomed stood eating
their sweet corn, but Ulysses hung the blood-stained spoils of Dolon
at the stern of his ship, that they might prepare a sacred offering
to Minerva. As for themselves, they went into the sea and washed the
sweat from their bodies, and from their necks and thighs. When the
sea-water had taken all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed
them, they went into the baths and washed themselves. After they had
so done and had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table,
and drawing from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine
to Minerva. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XI

And now as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus, harbinger of
light alike to mortals and immortals, Jove sent fierce Discord with
the ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the Achaeans. She took
her stand by the huge black hull of Ulysses' ship which was middlemost
of all, so that her voice might carry farthest on either side, on
the one hand towards the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the
other towards those of Achilles- for these two heroes, well-assured
of their own strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the
two ends of the line. There she took her stand, and raised a cry both
loud and shrill that filled the Achaeans with courage, giving them
heart to fight resolutely and with all their might, so that they had
rather stay there and do battle than go home in their ships.

The son of Atreus shouted aloud and bade the Argives gird themselves
for battle while he put on his armour. First he girded his goodly
greaves about his legs, making them fast with ankle clasps of silver;
and about his chest he set the breastplate which Cinyras had once
given him as a guest-gift. It had been noised abroad as far as Cyprus
that the Achaeans were about to sail for Troy, and therefore he gave
it to the king. It had ten courses of dark cyanus, twelve of gold,
and ten of tin. There were serpents of cyanus that reared themselves
up towards the neck, three upon either side, like the rainbows which
the son of Saturn has set in heaven as a sign to mortal men. About
his shoulders he threw his sword, studded with bosses of gold; and
the scabbard was of silver with a chain of gold wherewith to hang
it. He took moreover the richly-dight shield that covered his body
when he was in battle- fair to see, with ten circles of bronze running
all round see, wit it. On the body of the shield there were twenty
bosses of white tin, with another of dark cyanus in the middle: this
last was made to show a Gorgon's head, fierce and grim, with Rout
and Panic on either side. The band for the arm to go through was of
silver, on which there was a writhing snake of cyanus with three heads
that sprang from a single neck, and went in and out among one another.
On his head Agamemnon set a helmet, with a peak before and behind,
and four plumes of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it; then
he grasped two redoubtable bronze-shod spears, and the gleam of his
armour shot from him as a flame into the firmament, while Juno and
Minerva thundered in honour of the king of rich Mycene. 

Every man now left his horses in charge of his charioteer to hold
them in readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot
clad in full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning.
The chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there,
but these came up presently. The son of Saturn sent a portent of evil
sound about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was
about to send many a brave man hurrying down to Hades. 

The Trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain,
were gathered round great Hector, noble Polydamas, Aeneas who was
honoured by the Trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of Antenor,
Polybus, Agenor, and young Acamas beauteous as a god. Hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was Hector now seen in the front ranks and now again
in the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning
of aegis-bearing Jove. 

And now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon a
rich man's land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even so did
the Trojans and Achaeans fall upon one another; they were in no mood
for yielding but fought like wolves, and neither side got the better
of the other. Discord was glad as she beheld them, for she was the
only god that went among them; the others were not there, but stayed
quietly each in his own home among the dells and valleys of Olympus.
All of them blamed the son of Saturn for wanting to Live victory to
the Trojans, but father Jove heeded them not: he held aloof from all,
and sat apart in his all-glorious majesty, looking down upon the city
of the Trojans, the ships of the Achaeans, the gleam of bronze, and
alike upon the slayers and on the slain. 

Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning, their darts
rained thick on one another and the people perished, but as the hour
drew nigh when a woodman working in some mountain forest will get
his midday meal- for he has felled till his hands are weary; he is
tired out, and must now have food- then the Danaans with a cry that
rang through all their ranks, broke the battalions of the enemy. Agamemnon
led them on, and slew first Bienor, a leader of his people, and afterwards
his comrade and charioteer Oileus, who sprang from his chariot and
was coming full towards him; but Agamemnon struck him on the forehead
with his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against the weapon,
which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were battered
in and he was killed in full fight. 

Agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their
breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. He then went on to
kill Isus and Antiphus two sons of Priam, the one a bastard, the other
born in wedlock; they were in the same chariot- the bastard driving,
while noble Antiphus fought beside him. Achilles had once taken both
of them prisoners in the glades of Ida, and had bound them with fresh
withes as they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them;
now, however, Agamemnon son of Atreus smote Isus in the chest above
the nipple with his spear, while he struck Antiphus hard by the ear
and threw him from his chariot. Forthwith he stripped their goodly
armour from off them and recognized them, for he had already seen
them at ships when Achilles brought them in from Ida. As a lion fastens
on the fawns of a hind and crushes them in his great jaws, robbing
them of their tender life while he on his way back to his lair- the
hind can do nothing for them even though she be close by, for she
is in an agony of fear, and flies through the thick forest, sweating,
and at her utmost speed before the mighty monster- so, no man of the
Trojans could help Isus and Antiphus, for they were themselves flying
panic before the Argives. 

Then King Agamemnon took the two sons of Antimachus, Pisander and
brave Hippolochus. It was Antimachus who had been foremost in preventing
Helen's being restored to Menelaus, for he was largely bribed by Alexandrus;
and now Agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same chariot, trying
to bring their horses to a stand- for they had lost hold of the reins
and the horses were mad with fear. The son of Atreus sprang upon them
like a lion, and the pair besought him from their chariot. "Take us
alive," they cried, "son of Atreus, and you shall receive a great
ransom for us. Our father Antimachus has great store of gold, bronze,
and wrought iron, and from this he will satisfy you with a very large
ransom should he hear of our being alive at the ships of the Achaeans."

With such piteous words and tears did they beseech the king, but they
heard no pitiful answer in return. "If," said Agamemnon, "you are
sons of Antimachus, who once at a council of Trojans proposed that
Menelaus and Ulysses, who had come to you as envoys, should be killed
and not suffered to return, you shall now pay for the foul iniquity
of your father." 

As he spoke he felled Pisander from his chariot to the earth, smiting
him on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face uppermost upon
the ground. Hippolochus fled, but him too did Agamemnon smite; he
cut off his hands and his head- which he sent rolling in among the
crowd as though it were a ball. There he let them both lie, and wherever
the ranks were thickest thither he flew, while the other Achaeans
followed. Foot soldiers drove the foot soldiers of the foe in rout
before them, and slew them; horsemen did the like by horsemen, and
the thundering tramp of the horses raised a cloud of dust frim off
the plain. King Agamemnon followed after, ever slaying them and cheering
on the Achaeans. As when some mighty forest is all ablaze- the eddying
gusts whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and are
consumed before the blast of the flame- even so fell the heads of
the flying Trojans before Agamemnon son of Atreus, and many a noble
pair of steeds drew an empty chariot along the highways of war, for
lack of drivers who were lying on the plain, more useful now to vultures
than to their wives. 

Jove drew Hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage and
din of battle; but the son of Atreus sped onwards, calling out lustily
to the Danaans. They flew on by the tomb of old Ilus, son of Dardanus,
in the middle of the plain, and past the place of the wild fig-tree
making always for the city- the son of Atreus still shouting, and
with hands all bedrabbled in gore; but when they had reached the Scaean
gates and the oak tree, there they halted and waited for the others
to come up. Meanwhile the Trojans kept on flying over the middle of
the plain like a herd cows maddened with fright when a lion has attacked
them in the dead of night- he springs on one of them, seizes her neck
in the grip of his strong teeth and then laps up her blood and gorges
himself upon her entrails- even so did King Agamemnon son of Atreus
pursue the foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell
before him. Many a man was flung headlong from his chariot by the
hand of the son of Atreus, for he wielded his spear with fury.

But when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the
father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat, thunderbolt
in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained Ida. He then told Iris
of the golden wings to carry a message for him. "Go," said he, "fleet
Iris, and speak thus to Hector- say that so long as he sees Agamemnon
heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, he is to keep
aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when Agamemnon
is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his chariot, then
will I vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the ships and
night falls at the going down of the sun." 

Iris hearkened and obeyed. Down she went to strong Ilius from the
crests of Ida, and found Hector son of Priam standing by his chariot
and horses. Then she said, "Hector son of Priam, peer of gods in counsel,
father Jove has sent me to bear you this message- so long as you see
Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, you
are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle,
but when Agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes
to his chariot, then will Jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till
you reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of the
sun." 

When she had thus spoken Iris left him, and Hector sprang full armed
from his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he went about
everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to fight, and stirring
the dread strife of battle. The Trojans then wheeled round, and again
met the Achaeans, while the Argives on their part strengthened their
battalions. The battle was now in array and they stood face to face
with one another, Agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness
to be ahead of all others. 

Tell me now ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus, who, whether
of the Trojans or of their allies, was first to face Agamemnon? It
was Iphidamas son of Antenor, a man both brave and of great stature,
who was brought up in fertile Thrace the mother of sheep. Cisses,
his mother's father, brought him up in his own house when he was a
child- Cisses, father to fair Theano. When he reached manhood, Cisses
would have kept him there, and was for giving him his daughter in
marriage, but as soon as he had married he set out to fight the Achaeans
with twelve ships that followed him: these he had left at Percote
and had come on by land to Ilius. He it was that naw met Agamemnon
son of Atreus. When they were close up with one another, the son of
Atreus missed his aim, and Iphidamas hit him on the girdle below the
cuirass and then flung himself upon him, trusting to his strength
of arm; the girdle, however, was not pierced, nor nearly so, for the
point of the spear struck against the silver and was turned aside
as though it had been lead: King Agamemnon caught it from his hand,
and drew it towards him with the fury of a lion; he then drew his
sword, and killed Iphidamas by striking him on the neck. So there
the poor fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were of bronze, killed
in the defence of his fellow-citizens, far from his wedded wife, of
whom he had had no joy though he had given much for her: he had given
a hundred-head of cattle down, and had promised later on to give a
thousand sheep and goats mixed, from the countless flocks of which
he was possessed. Agamemnon son of Atreus then despoiled him, and
carried off his armour into the host of the Achaeans. 

When noble Coon, Antenor's eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were
his eyes at the sight of his fallen brother. Unseen by Agamemnon he
got beside him, spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle of his
arm below the elbow, the point of the spear going right through the
arm. Agamemnon was convulsed with pain, but still not even for this
did he leave off struggling and fighting, but grasped his spear that
flew as fleet as the wind, and sprang upon Coon who was trying to
drag off the body of his brother- his father's son- by the foot, and
was crying for help to all the bravest of his comrades; but Agamemnon
struck him with a bronze-shod spear and killed him as he was dragging
the dead body through the press of men under cover of his shield:
he then cut off his head, standing over the body of Iphidamas. Thus
did the sons of Antenor meet their fate at the hands of the son of
Atreus, and go down into the house of Hades. 

As long as the blood still welled warm from his wound Agamemnon went
about attacking the ranks of the enemy with spear and sword and with
great handfuls of stone, but when the blood had ceased to flow and
the wound grew dry, the pain became great. As the sharp pangs which
the Eilithuiae, goddesses of childbirth, daughters of Juno and dispensers
of cruel pain, send upon a woman when she is in labour- even so sharp
were the pangs of the son of Atreus. He sprang on to his chariot,
and bade his charioteer drive to the ships, for he was in great agony.
With a loud clear voice he shouted to the Danaans, "My friends, princes
and counsellors of the Argives, defend the ships yourselves, for Jove
has not suffered me to fight the whole day through against the Trojans."

With this the charioteer turned his horses towards the ships, and
they flew forward nothing loth. Their chests were white with foam
and their bellies with dust, as they drew the wounded king out of
the battle. 

When Hector saw Agamemnon quit the field, he shouted to the Trojans
and Lycians saying, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanian warriors, be
men, my friends, and acquit yourselves in battle bravely; their best
man has left them, and Jove has vouchsafed me a great triumph; charge
the foe with your chariots that. you may win still greater glory."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a huntsman
hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so did Hector,
peer of Mars, hound the proud Trojans on against the Achaeans. Full
of hope he plunged in among the foremost, and fell on the fight like
some fierce tempest that swoops down upon the sea, and lashes its
deep blue waters into fury. 

What, then is the full tale of those whom Hector son of Priam killed
in the hour of triumph which Jove then vouchsafed him? First Asaeus,
Autonous, and Opites; Dolops son of Clytius, Opheltius and Agelaus;
Aesymnus, Orus and Hipponous steadfast in battle; these chieftains
of the Achaeans did Hector slay, and then he fell upon the rank and
file. As when the west wind hustles the clouds of the white south
and beats them down with the fierceness of its fury- the waves of
the sea roll high, and the spray is flung aloft in the rage of the
wandering wind- even so thick were the heads of them that fell by
the hand of Hector. 

All had then been lost and no help for it, and the Achaeans would
have fled pell-mell to their ships, had not Ulysses cried out to Diomed,
"Son of Tydeus, what has happened to us that we thus forget our prowess?
Come, my good fellow, stand by my side and help me, we shall be shamed
for ever if Hector takes the ships." 

And Diomed answered, "Come what may, I will stand firm; but we shall
have scant joy of it, for Jove is minded to give victory to the Trojans
rather than to us." 

With these words he struck Thymbraeus from his chariot to the ground,
smiting him in the left breast with his spear, while Ulysses killed
Molion who was his squire. These they let lie, now that they had stopped
their fighting; the two heroes then went on playing havoc with the
foe, like two wild boars that turn in fury and rend the hounds that
hunt them. Thus did they turn upon the Trojans and slay them, and
the Achaeans were thankful to have breathing time in their flight
from Hector. 

They then took two princes with their chariot, the two sons of Merops
of Percote, who excelled all others in the arts of divination. He
had forbidden his sons to go to the war, but they would not obey him,
for fate lured them to their fall. Diomed son of Tydeus slew them
both and stripped them of their armour, while Ulysses killed Hippodamus
and Hypeirochus. 

And now the son of Saturn as he looked down from Ida ordained that
neither side should have the advantage, and they kept on killing one
another. The son of Tydeus speared Agastrophus son of Paeon in the
hip-joint with his spear. His chariot was not at hand for him to fly
with, so blindly confident had he been. His squire was in charge of
it at some distance and he was fighting on foot among the foremost
until he lost his life. Hector soon marked the havoc Diomed and Ulysses
were making, and bore down upon them with a loud cry, followed by
the Trojan ranks; brave Diomed was dismayed when he saw them, and
said to Ulysses who was beside him, "Great Hector is bearing down
upon us and we shall be undone; let us stand firm and wait his onset."

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it, nor did he miss his
mark. He had aimed at Hector's head near the top of his helmet, but
bronze was turned by bronze, and Hector was untouched, for the spear
was stayed by the visored helm made with three plates of metal, which
Phoebus Apollo had given him. Hector sprang back with a great bound
under cover of the ranks; he fell on his knees and propped himself
with his brawny hand leaning on the ground, for darkness had fallen
on his eyes. The son of Tydeus having thrown his spear dashed in among
the foremost fighters, to the place where he had seen it strike the
ground; meanwhile Hector recovered himself and springing back into
his chariot mingled with the crowd, by which means he saved his life.
But Diomed made at him with his spear and said, "Dog, you have again
got away though death was close on your heels. Phoebus Apollo, to
whom I ween you pray ere you go into battle, has again saved you,
nevertheless I will meet you and make and end of you hereafter, if
there is any god who will stand by me too and be my helper. For the
present I must pursue those I can lay hands on." 

As he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of Paeon, but
Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen aimed an arrow at him, leaning
against a pillar of the monument which men had raised to Ilus son
of Dardanus, a ruler in days of old. Diomed had taken the cuirass
from off the breast of Agastrophus, his heavy helmet also, and the
shield from off his shoulders, when Paris drew his bow and let fly
an arrow that sped not from his hand in vain, but pierced the flat
of Diomed's right foot, going right through it and fixing itself in
the ground. Thereon Paris with a hearty laugh sprang forward from
his hiding-place, and taunted him saying, "You are wounded- my arrow
has not been shot in vain; would that it had hit you in the belly
and killed you, for thus the Trojans, who fear you as goats fear a
lion, would have had a truce from evil." 

Diomed all undaunted answered, "Archer, you who without your bow are
nothing, slanderer and seducer, if you were to be tried in single
combat fighting in full armour, your bow and your arrows would serve
you in little stead. Vain is your boast in that you have scratched
the sole of my foot. I care no more than if a girl or some silly boy
had hit me. A worthless coward can inflict but a light wound; when
I wound a man though I but graze his skin it is another matter, for
my weapon will lay him low. His wife will tear her cheeks for grief
and his children will be fatherless: there will he rot, reddening
the earth with his blood, and vultures, not women, will gather round
him." 

Thus he spoke, but Ulysses came up and stood over him. Under this
cover he sat down to draw the arrow from his foot, and sharp was the
pain he suffered as he did so. Then he sprang on to his chariot and
bade the charioteer drive him to the ships, for he was sick at heart.

Ulysses was now alone; not one of the Argives stood by him, for they
were all panic-stricken. "Alas," said he to himself in his dismay,
"what will become of me? It is ill if I turn and fly before these
odds, but it will be worse if I am left alone and taken prisoner,
for the son of Saturn has struck the rest of the Danaans with panic.
But why talk to myself in this way? Well do I know that though cowards
quit the field, a hero, whether he wound or be wounded, must stand
firm and hold his own." 

While he was thus in two minds, the ranks of the Trojans advanced
and hemmed him in, and bitterly did they come to me it. As hounds
and lusty youths set upon a wild boar that sallies from his lair whetting
his white tusks- they attack him from every side and can hear the
gnashing of his jaws, but for all his fierceness they still hold their
ground- even so furiously did the Trojans attack Ulysses. First he
sprang spear in hand upon Deiopites and wounded him on the shoulder
with a downward blow; then he killed Thoon and Ennomus. After these
he struck Chersidamas in the loins under his shield as he had just
sprung down from his chariot; so he fell in the dust and clutched
the earth in the hollow of his hand. These he let lie, and went on
to wound Charops son of Hippasus own brother to noble Socus. Socus,
hero that he was, made all speed to help him, and when he was close
to Ulysses he said, "Far-famed Ulysses, insatiable of craft and toil,
this day you shall either boast of having killed both the sons of
Hippasus and stripped them of their armour, or you shall fall before
my spear." 

With these words he struck the shield of Ulysses. The spear went through
the shield and passed on through his richly wrought cuirass, tearing
the flesh from his side, but Pallas Minerva did not suffer it to pierce
the entrails of the hero. Ulysses knew that his hour was not yet come,
but he gave ground and said to Socus, "Wretch, you shall now surely
die. You have stayed me from fighting further with the Trojans, but
you shall now fall by my spear, yielding glory to myself, and your
soul to Hades of the noble steeds." 

Socus had turned in flight, but as he did so, the spear struck him
in the back midway between the shoulders, and went right through his
chest. He fell heavily to the ground and Ulysses vaunted over him
saying, "O Socus, son of Hippasus tamer of horses, death has been
too quick for you and you have not escaped him: poor wretch, not even
in death shall your father and mother close your eyes, but the ravening
vultures shall enshroud you with the flapping of their dark wings
and devour you. Whereas even though I fall the Achaeans will give
me my due rites of burial." 

So saying he drew Socus's heavy spear out of his flesh and from his
shield, and the blood welled forth when the spear was withdrawn so
that he was much dismayed. When the Trojans saw that Ulysses was bleeding
they raised a great shout and came on in a body towards him; he therefore
gave ground, and called his comrades to come and help him. Thrice
did he cry as loudly as man can cry, and thrice did brave Menelaus
hear him; he turned, therefore, to Ajax who was close beside him and
said, "Ajax, noble son of Telamon, captain of your people, the cry
of Ulysses rings in my ears, as though the Trojans had cut him off
and were worsting him while he is single-handed. Let us make our way
through the throng; it will be well that we defend him; I fear he
may come to harm for all his valour if he be left without support,
and the Danaans would miss him sorely." 

He led the way and mighty Ajax went with him. The Trojans had gathered
round Ulysses like ravenous mountain jackals round the carcase of
some homed stag that has been hit with an arrow- the stag has fled
at full speed so long as his blood was warm and his strength has lasted,
but when the arrow has overcome him, the savage jackals devour him
in the shady glades of the forest. Then heaven sends a fierce lion
thither, whereon the jackals fly in terror and the lion robs them
of their prey- even so did Trojans many and brave gather round crafty
Ulysses, but the hero stood at bay and kept them off with his spear.
Ajax then came up with his shield before him like a wall, and stood
hard by, whereon the Trojans fled in all directions. Menelaus took
Ulysses by the hand, and led him out of the press while his squire
brought up his chariot, but Ajax rushed furiously on the Trojans and
killed Doryclus, a bastard son of Priam; then he wounded Pandocus,
Lysandrus, Pyrasus, and Pylartes; as some swollen torrent comes rushing
in full flood from the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain
of heaven- many a dry oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much
mud does it bring down and cast into the sea- even so did brave Ajax
chase the foe furiously over the plain, slaying both men and horses.

Hector did not yet know what Ajax was doing, for he was fighting on
the extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river Scamander,
where the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round Nestor
and brave Idomeneus. Among these Hector was making great slaughter
with his spear and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that
were opposed to him; still the Achaeans would have given no ground,
had not Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen stayed the prowess of Machaon
shepherd of his people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with
a triple-barbed arrow. The Achaeans were in great fear that as the
fight had turned against them the Trojans might take him prisoner,
and Idomeneus said to Nestor, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the
Achaean name, mount your chariot at once; take Machaon with you and
drive your horses to the ships as fast as you can. A physician is
worth more than several other men put together, for he can cut out
arrows and spread healing herbs." 

Nestor knight of Gerene did as Idomeneus had counselled; he at once
mounted his chariot, and Machaon son of the famed physician Aesculapius
went with him. He lashed his horses and they flew onward nothing loth
towards the ships, as though of their own free will. 

Then Cebriones seeing the Trojans in confusion said to Hector from
his place beside him, "Hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme
wing of the battle, while the other Trojans are in pell-mell rout,
they and their horses. Ajax son of Telamon is driving them before
him; I know him by the breadth of his shield: let us turn our chariot
and horses thither, where horse and foot are fighting most desperately,
and where the cry of battle is loudest." 

With this he lashed his goodly steeds, and when they felt the whip
they drew the chariot full speed among the Achaeans and Trojans, over
the bodies and shields of those that had fallen: the axle was bespattered
with blood, and the rail round the car was covered with splashes both
from the horses' hoofs and from the tyres of the wheels. Hector tore
his way through and flung himself into the thick of the fight, and
his presence threw the Danaans into confusion, for his spear was not
long idle; nevertheless though he went among the ranks with sword
and spear, and throwing great stones, he avoided Ajax son of Telamon,
for Jove would have been angry with him if he had fought a better
man than himself. 

Then father Jove from his high throne struck fear into the heart of
Ajax, so that he stood there dazed and threw his shield behind him-
looking fearfully at the throng of his foes as though he were some
wild beast, and turning hither and thither but crouching slowly backwards.
As peasants with their hounds chase a lion from their stockyard, and
watch by night to prevent his carrying off the pick of their herd-
he makes his greedy spring, but in vain, for the darts from many a
strong hand fall thick around him, with burning brands that scare
him for all his fury, and when morning comes he slinks foiled and
angry away- even so did Ajax, sorely against his will, retreat angrily
before the Trojans, fearing for the ships of the Achaeans. Or as some
lazy ass that has had many a cudgel broken about his back, when he
into a field begins eating the corn- boys beat him but he is too many
for them, and though they lay about with their sticks they cannot
hurt him; still when he has had his fill they at last drive him from
the field- even so did the Trojans and their allies pursue great Ajax,
ever smiting the middle of his shield with their darts. Now and again
he would turn and show fight, keeping back the battalions of the Trojans,
and then he would again retreat; but he prevented any of them from
making his way to the ships. Single-handed he stood midway between
the Trojans and Achaeans: the spears that sped from their hands stuck
some of them in his mighty shield, while many, though thirsting for
his blood, fell to the ground ere they could reach him to the wounding
of his fair flesh. 

Now when Eurypylus the brave son of Euaemon saw that Ajax was being
overpowered by the rain of arrows, he went up to him and hurled his
spear. He struck Apisaon son of Phausius in the liver below the midriff,
and laid him low. Eurypylus sprang upon him, and stripped the armour
from his shoulders; but when Alexandrus saw him, he aimed an arrow
at him which struck him in the right thigh; the arrow broke, but the
point that was left in the wound dragged on the thigh; he drew back,
therefore, under cover of his comrades to save his life, shouting
as he did so to the Danaans, "My friends, princes and counsellors
of the Argives, rally to the defence of Ajax who is being overpowered,
and I doubt whether he will come out of the fight alive. Hither, then,
to the rescue of great Ajax son of Telamon." 

Even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near,
and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their shoulders
so as to give him cover. Ajax then made towards them, and turned round
to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men. 

Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the
mares of Neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing Nestor out
of the fight, and with him Machaon shepherd of his people. Achilles
saw and took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching
the hard stress and struggle of the fight. He called from the ship
to his comrade Patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking
like Mars himself- here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently
befell him. "Why," said he, "Achilles do you call me? what do you
what do you want with me?" And Achilles answered, "Noble son of Menoetius,
man after my own heart, I take it that I shall now have the Achaeans
praying at my knees, for they are in great straits; go, Patroclus,
and ask Nestor who is that he is bearing away wounded from the field;
from his back I should say it was Machaon son of Aesculapius, but
I could not see his face for the horses went by me at full speed."

Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running
by the ships and tents of the Achaeans. 

When Nestor and Machaon had reached the tents of the son of Neleus,
they dismounted, and an esquire, Eurymedon, took the horses from the
chariot. The pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the
sweat from their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside
and took their seats. Fair Hecamede, whom Nestor had had awarded to
him from Tenedos when Achilles took it, mixed them a mess; she was
daughter of wise Arsinous, and the Achaeans had given her to Nestor
because he excelled all of them in counsel. First she set for them
a fair and well-made table that had feet of cyanus; on it there was
a vessel of bronze and an onion to give relish to the drink, with
honey and cakes of barley-meal. There was also a cup of rare workmanship
which the old man had brought with him from home, studded with bosses
of gold; it had four handles, on each of which there were two golden
doves feeding, and it had two feet to stand on. Any one else would
hardly have been able to lift it from the table when it was full,
but Nestor could do so quite easily. In this the woman, as fair as
a goddess, mixed them a mess with Pramnian wine; she grated goat's
milk cheese into it with a bronze grater, threw in a handful of white
barley-meal, and having thus prepared the mess she bade them drink
it. When they had done so and had thus quenched their thirst, they
fell talking with one another, and at this moment Patroclus appeared
at the door. 

When the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand,
led him into the tent, and bade him take his place among them; but
Patroclus stood where he was and said, "Noble sir, I may not stay,
you cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me is not one to be
trifled with, and he bade me ask who the wounded man was whom you
were bearing away from the field. I can now see for myself that he
is Machaon shepherd of his people. I must go back and tell Achilles.
You, sir, know what a terrible man he is, and how ready to blame even
where no blame should lie." 

And Nestor answered, "Why should Achilles care to know how many of
the Achaeans may be wounded? He recks not of the dismay that reigns
in our host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave Diomed
son of Tydeus is wounded; so are Ulysses and Agamemnon; Eurypylus
has been hit with an arrow in the thigh, and I have just been bringing
this man from the field- he too wounded- with an arrow; nevertheless
Achilles, so valiant though he be, cares not and knows no ruth. Will
he wait till the ships, do what we may, are in a blaze, and we perish
one upon the other? As for me, I have no strength nor stay in me any
longer; would that I Were still young and strong as in the days when
there was a fight between us and the men of Elis about some cattle-raiding.
I then killed Itymoneus the valiant son of Hypeirochus a dweller in
Elis, as I was driving in the spoil; he was hit by a dart thrown my
hand while fighting in the front rank in defence of his cows, so he
fell and the country people around him were in great fear. We drove
off a vast quantity of booty from the plain, fifty herds of cattle
and as many flocks of sheep; fifty droves also of pigs, and as many
wide-spreading flocks of goats. Of horses moreover we seized a hundred
and fifty, all of them mares, and many had foals running with them.
All these did we drive by night to Pylus the city of Neleus, taking
them within the city; and the heart of Neleus was glad in that I had
taken so much, though it was the first time I had ever been in the
field. At daybreak the heralds went round crying that all in Elis
to whom there was a debt owing should come; and the leading Pylians
assembled to divide the spoils. There were many to whom the Epeans
owed chattels, for we men of Pylus were few and had been oppressed
with wrong; in former years Hercules had come, and had laid his hand
heavy upon us, so that all our best men had perished. Neleus had had
twelve sons, but I alone was left; the others had all been killed.
The Epeans presuming upon all this had looked down upon us and had
done us much evil. My father chose a herd of cattle and a great flock
of sheep- three hundred in all- and he took their shepherds with him,
for there was a great debt due to him in Elis, to wit four horses,
winners of prizes. They and their chariots with them had gone to the
games and were to run for a tripod, but King Augeas took them, and
sent back their driver grieving for the loss of his horses. Neleus
was angered by what he had both said and done, and took great value
in return, but he divided the rest, that no man might have less than
his full share. 

"Thus did we order all things, and offer sacrifices to the gods throughout
the city; but three days afterwards the Epeans came in a body, many
in number, they and their chariots, in full array, and with them the
two Moliones in their armour, though they were still lads and unused
to fighting. Now there is a certain town, Thryoessa, perched upon
a rock on the river Alpheus, the border city Pylus; this they would
destroy, and pitched their camp about it, but when they had crossed
their whole plain, Minerva darted down by night from Olympus and bade
us set ourselves in array; and she found willing soldiers in Pylos,
for the men meant fighting. Neleus would not let me arm, and hid my
horses, for he said that as yet I could know nothing about war; nevertheless
Minerva so ordered the fight that, all on foot as I was, I fought
among our mounted forces and vied with the foremost of them. There
is a river Minyeius that falls into the sea near Arene, and there
they that were mounted (and I with them) waited till morning, when
the companies of foot soldiers came up with us in force. Thence in
full panoply and equipment we came towards noon to the sacred waters
of the Alpheus, and there we offered victims to almighty Jove, with
a bull to Alpheus, another to Neptune, and a herd-heifer to Minerva.
After this we took supper in our companies, and laid us down to rest
each in his armour by the river. 

"The Epeans were beleaguering the city and were determined to take
it, but ere this might be there was a desperate fight in store for
them. When the sun's rays began to fall upon the earth we joined battle,
praying to Jove and to Minerva, and when the fight had begun, I was
the first to kill my man and take his horses- to wit the warrior Mulius.
He was son-in-law to Augeas, having married his eldest daughter, golden-haired
Agamede, who knew the virtues of every herb which grows upon the face
of the earth. I speared him as he was coming towards me, and when
he fell headlong in the dust, I sprang upon his chariot and took my
place in the front ranks. The Epeans fled in all directions when they
saw the captain of their horsemen (the best man they had) laid low,
and I swept down on them like a whirlwind, taking fifty chariots-
and in each of them two men bit the dust, slain by my spear. I should
have even killed the two Moliones sons of Actor, unless their real
father, Neptune lord of the earthquake, had hidden them in a thick
mist and borne them out of the fight. Thereon Jove vouchsafed the
Pylians a great victory, for we chased them far over the plain, killing
the men and bringing in their armour, till we had brought our horses
to Buprasium rich in wheat and to the Olenian rock, with the hill
that is called Alision, at which point Minerva turned the people back.
There I slew the last man and left him; then the Achaeans drove their
horses back from Buprasium to Pylos and gave thanks to Jove among
the gods, and among mortal men to Nestor. 

"Such was I among my peers, as surely as ever was, but Achilles is
for keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue it hereafter
when the host is being cut to pieces. My good friend, did not Menoetius
charge you thus, on the day when he sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon?
Ulysses and I were in the house, inside, and heard all that he said
to you; for we came to the fair house of Peleus while beating up recruits
throughout all Achaea, and when we got there we found Menoetius and
yourself, and Achilles with you. The old knight Peleus was in the
outer court, roasting the fat thigh-bones of a heifer to Jove the
lord of thunder; and he held a gold chalice in his hand from which
he poured drink-offerings of wine over the burning sacrifice. You
two were busy cutting up the heifer, and at that moment we stood at
the gates, whereon Achilles sprang to his feet, led us by the hand
into the house, placed us at table, and set before us such hospitable
entertainment as guests expect. When we had satisfied ourselves with
meat and drink, I said my say and urged both of you to join us. You
were ready enough to do so, and the two old men charged you much and
straitly. Old Peleus bade his son Achilles fight ever among the foremost
and outvie his peers, while Menoetius the son of Actor spoke thus
to you: 'My son,' said he, 'Achilles is of nobler birth than you are,
but you are older than he, though he is far the better man of the
two. Counsel him wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will follow
you to his own profit.' Thus did your father charge you, but you have
forgotten; nevertheless, even now, say all this to Achilles if he
will listen to you. Who knows but with heaven's help you may talk
him over, for it is good to take a friend's advice. If, however, he
is fearful about some oracle, or if his mother has told him something
from Jove, then let him send you, and let the rest of the Myrmidons
follow with you, if perchance you may bring light and saving to the
Danaans. And let him send you into battle clad in his own armour,
that the Trojans may mistake you for him and leave off fighting; the
sons of the Achaeans may thus have time to get their breath, for they
are hard pressed and there is little breathing time in battle. You,
who are fresh, might easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls
and away from the tents and ships." 

With these words he moved the heart of Patroclus, who set off running
by the line of the ships to Achilles, descendant of Aeacus. When he
had got as far as the ships of Ulysses, where was their place of assembly
and court of justice, with their altars dedicated to the gods, Eurypylus
son of Euaemon met him, wounded in the thigh with an arrow, and limping
out of the fight. Sweat rained from his head and shoulders, and black
blood welled from his cruel wound, but his mind did not wander. The
son of Menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon him and spoke
piteously saying, "O unhappy princes and counsellors of the Danaans,
are you then doomed to feed the hounds of Troy with your fat, far
from your friends and your native land? say, noble Eurypylus, will
the Achaeans be able to hold great Hector in check, or will they fall
now before his spear?" 

Wounded Eurypylus made answer, "Noble Patroclus, there is no hope
left for the Achaeans but they will perish at their ships. All they
that were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the
hands of the Trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. But save
me and take me to your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash
the black blood from off it with warm water, and lay upon it those
gracious herbs which, so they say, have been shown you by Achilles,
who was himself shown them by Chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs.
For of the physicians Podalirius and Machaon, I hear that the one
is lying wounded in his tent and is himself in need of healing, while
the other is fighting the Trojans upon the plain." 

"Hero Eurypylus," replied the brave son of Menoetius, "how may these
things be? What can I do? I am on my way to bear a message to noble
Achilles from Nestor of Gerene, bulwark of the Achaeans, but even
so I will not be unmindful your distress." 

With this he clasped him round the middle and led him into the tent,
and a servant, when he saw him, spread bullock-skins on the ground
for him to lie on. He laid him at full length and cut out the sharp
arrow from his thigh; he washed the black blood from the wound with
warm water; he then crushed a bitter herb, rubbing it between his
hands, and spread it upon the wound; this was a virtuous herb which
killed all pain; so the wound presently dried and the blood left off
flowing. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XII

So the son of Menoetius was attending to the hurt of Eurypylus within
the tent, but the Argives and Trojans still fought desperately, nor
were the trench and the high wall above it, to keep the Trojans in
check longer. They had built it to protect their ships, and had dug
the trench all round it that it might safeguard both the ships and
the rich spoils which they had taken, but they had not offered hecatombs
to the gods. It had been built without the consent of the immortals,
and therefore it did not last. So long as Hector lived and Achilles
nursed his anger, and so long as the city of Priam remained untaken,
the great wall of the Achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of
the Trojans were no more, and many also of the Argives, though some
were yet left alive when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth
year, and the Argives had gone back with their ships to their own
country- then Neptune and Apollo took counsel to destroy the wall,
and they turned on to it the streams of all the rivers from Mount
Ida into the sea, Rhesus, Heptaporus, Caresus, Rhodius, Grenicus,
Aesopus, and goodly Scamander, with Simois, where many a shield and
helm had fallen, and many a hero of the race of demigods had bitten
the dust. Phoebus Apollo turned the mouths of all these rivers together
and made them flow for nine days against the wall, while Jove rained
the whole time that he might wash it sooner into the sea. Neptune
himself, trident in hand, surveyed the work and threw into the sea
all the foundations of beams and stones which the Achaeans had laid
with so much toil; he made all level by the mighty stream of the Hellespont,
and then when he had swept the wall away he spread a great beach of
sand over the place where it had been. This done he turned the rivers
back into their old courses. 

This was what Neptune and Apollo were to do in after time; but as
yet battle and turmoil were still raging round the wall till its timbers
rang under the blows that rained upon them. The Argives, cowed by
the scourge of Jove, were hemmed in at their ships in fear of Hector
the mighty minister of Rout, who as heretofore fought with the force
and fury of a whirlwind. As a lion or wild boar turns fiercely on
the dogs and men that attack him, while these form solid wall and
shower their javelins as they face him- his courage is all undaunted,
but his high spirit will be the death of him; many a time does he
charge at his pursuers to scatter them, and they fall back as often
as he does so- even so did Hector go about among the host exhorting
his men, and cheering them on to cross the trench. 

But the horses dared not do so, and stood neighing upon its brink,
for the width frightened them. They could neither jump it nor cross
it, for it had overhanging banks all round upon either side, above
which there were the sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaeans had
planted so close and strong as a defence against all who would assail
it; a horse, therefore, could not get into it and draw his chariot
after him, but those who were on foot kept trying their very utmost.
Then Polydamas went up to Hector and said, "Hector, and you other
captains of the Trojans and allies, it is madness for us to try and
drive our horses across the trench; it will be very hard to cross,
for it is full of sharp stakes, and beyond these there is the wall.
Our horses therefore cannot get down into it, and would be of no use
if they did; moreover it is a narrow place and we should come to harm.
If, indeed, great Jove is minded to help the Trojans, and in his anger
will utterly destroy the Achaeans, I would myself gladly see them
perish now and here far from Argos; but if they should rally and we
are driven back from the ships pell-mell into the trench there will
be not so much as a man get back to the city to tell the tale. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say; let our squires hold our horses
by the trench, but let us follow Hector in a body on foot, clad in
full armour, and if the day of their doom is at hand the Achaeans
will not be able to withstand us." 

Thus spoke Polydamas and his saying pleased Hector, who sprang in
full armour to the ground, and all the other Trojans, when they saw
him do so, also left their chariots. Each man then gave his horses
over to his charioteer in charge to hold them ready for him at the
trench. Then they formed themselves into companies, made themselves
ready, and in five bodies followed their leaders. Those that went
with Hector and Polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and
the most determined to break through the wall and fight at the ships.
Cebriones was also joined with them as third in command, for Hector
had left his chariot in charge of a less valiant soldier. The next
company was led by Paris, Alcathous, and Agenor; the third by Helenus
and Deiphobus, two sons of Priam, and with them was the hero Asius-
Asius the son of Hyrtacus, whose great black horses of the breed that
comes from the river Selleis had brought him from Arisbe. Aeneas the
valiant son of Anchises led the fourth; he and the two sons of Antenor,
Archelochus and Acamas, men well versed in all the arts of war. Sarpedon
was captain over the allies, and took with him Glaucus and Asteropaeus
whom he deemed most valiant after himself- for he was far the best
man of them all. These helped to array one another in their ox-hide
shields, and then charged straight at the Danaans, for they felt sure
that they would not hold out longer and that they should themselves
now fall upon the ships. 

The rest of the Trojans and their allies now followed the counsel
of Polydamas but Asius son of Hyrtacus would not leave his horses
and his esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness he took them on with
him towards the ships, nor did he fail to come by his end in consequence.
Nevermore was he to return to wind-beaten Ilius, exulting in his chariot
and his horses; ere he could do so, death of ill-omened name had overshadowed
him and he had fallen by the spear of Idomeneus the noble son of Deucalion.
He had driven towards the left wing of the ships, by which way the
Achaeans used to return with their chariots and horses from the plain.
Hither he drove and found the gates with their doors opened wide,
and the great bar down- for the gatemen kept them open so as to let
those of their comrades enter who might be flying towards the ships.
Hither of set purpose did he direct his horses, and his men followed
him with a loud cry, for they felt sure that the Achaeans would not
hold out longer, and that they should now fall upon the ships. Little
did they know that at the gates they should find two of the bravest
chieftains, proud sons of the fighting Lapithae- the one, Polypoetes,
mighty son of Pirithous, and the other Leonteus, peer of murderous
Mars. These stood before the gates like two high oak trees upon the
mountains, that tower from their wide-spreading roots, and year after
year battle with wind and rain- even so did these two men await the
onset of great Asius confidently and without flinching. The Trojans
led by him and by Iamenus, Orestes, Adamas the son of Asius, Thoon
and Oenomaus, raised a loud cry of battle and made straight for the
wall, holding their shields of dry ox-hide above their heads; for
a while the two defenders remained inside and cheered the Achaeans
on to stand firm in the defence of their ships; when, however, they
saw that the Trojans were attacking the wall, while the Danaans were
crying out for help and being routed, they rushed outside and fought
in front of the gates like two wild boars upon the mountains that
abide the attack of men and dogs, and charging on either side break
down the wood all round them tearing it up by the roots, and one can
hear the clattering of their tusks, till some one hits them and makes
an end of them- even so did the gleaming bronze rattle about their
breasts, as the weapons fell upon them; for they fought with great
fury, trusting to their own prowess and to those who were on the wall
above them. These threw great stones at their assailants in defence
of themselves their tents and their ships. The stones fell thick as
the flakes of snow which some fierce blast drives from the dark clouds
and showers down in sheets upon the earth- even so fell the weapons
from the hands alike of Trojans and Achaeans. Helmet and shield rang
out as the great stones rained upon them, and Asius the son of Hyrtacus
in his dismay cried aloud and smote his two thighs. "Father Jove,"
he cried, "of a truth you too are altogether given to lying. I made
sure the Argive heroes could not withstand us, whereas like slim-waisted
wasps, or bees that have their nests in the rocks by the wayside-
they leave not the holes wherein they have built undefended, but fight
for their little ones against all who would take them- even so these
men, though they be but two, will not be driven from the gates, but
stand firm either to slay or be slain." 

He spoke, but moved not the mind of Jove, whose counsel it then was
to give glory to Hector. Meanwhile the rest of the Trojans were fighting
about the other gates; I, however, am no god to be able to tell about
all these things, for the battle raged everywhere about the stone
wall as it were a fiery furnace. The Argives, discomfited though they
were, were forced to defend their ships, and all the gods who were
defending the Achaeans were vexed in spirit; but the Lapithae kept
on fighting with might and main. 

Thereon Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, hit Damasus with a spear
upon his cheek-pierced helmet. The helmet did not protect him, for
the point of the spear went through it, and broke the bone, so that
the brain inside was scattered about, and he died fighting. He then
slew Pylon and Ormenus. Leonteus, of the race of Mars, killed Hippomachus
the son of Antimachus by striking him with his spear upon the girdle.
He then drew his sword and sprang first upon Antiphates whom he killed
in combat, and who fell face upwards on the earth. After him he killed
Menon, Iamenus, and Orestes, and laid them low one after the other.

While they were busy stripping the armour from these heroes, the youths
who were led on by Polydamas and Hector (and these were the greater
part and the most valiant of those that were trying to break through
the wall and fire the ships) were still standing by the trench, uncertain
what they should do; for they had seen a sign from heaven when they
had essayed to cross it- a soaring eagle that flew skirting the left
wing of their host, with a monstrous blood-red snake in its talons
still alive and struggling to escape. The snake was still bent on
revenge, wriggling and twisting itself backwards till it struck the
bird that held it, on the neck and breast; whereon the bird being
in pain, let it fall, dropping it into the middle of the host, and
then flew down the wind with a sharp cry. The Trojans were struck
with terror when they saw the snake, portent of aegis-bearing Jove,
writhing in the midst of them, and Polydamas went up to Hector and
said, "Hector, at our councils of war you are ever given to rebuke
me, even when I speak wisely, as though it were not well, forsooth,
that one of the people should cross your will either in the field
or at the council board; you would have them support you always: nevertheless
I will say what I think will be best; let us not now go on to fight
the Danaans at their ships, for I know what will happen if this soaring
eagle which skirted the left wing of our with a monstrous blood-red
snake in its talons (the snake being still alive) was really sent
as an omen to the Trojans on their essaying to cross the trench. The
eagle let go her hold; she did not succeed in taking it home to her
little ones, and so will it be- with ourselves; even though by a mighty
effort we break through the gates and wall of the Achaeans, and they
give way before us, still we shall not return in good order by the
way we came, but shall leave many a man behind us whom the Achaeans
will do to death in defence of their ships. Thus would any seer who
was expert in these matters, and was trusted by the people, read the
portent." 

Hector looked fiercely at him and said, "Polydamas, I like not of
your reading. You can find a better saying than this if you will.
If, however, you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven
robbed you of your reason. You would have me pay no heed to the counsels
of Jove, nor to the promises he made me- and he bowed his head in
confirmation; you bid me be ruled rather by the flight of wild-fowl.
What care I whether they fly towards dawn or dark, and whether they
be on my right hand or on my left? Let us put our trust rather in
the counsel of great Jove, king of mortals and immortals. There is
one omen, and one only- that a man should fight for his country. Why
are you so fearful? Though we be all of us slain at the ships of the
Argives you are not likely to be killed yourself, for you are not
steadfast nor courageous. If you will. not fight, or would talk others
over from doing so, you shall fall forthwith before my spear."

With these words he led the way, and the others followed after with
a cry that rent the air. Then Jove the lord of thunder sent the blast
of a mighty wind from the mountains of Ida, that bore the dust down
towards the ships; he thus lulled the Achaeans into security, and
gave victory to Hector and to the Trojans, who, trusting to their
own might and to the signs he had shown them, essayed to break through
the great wall of the Achaeans. They tore down the breastworks from
the walls, and overthrew the battlements; they upheaved the buttresses,
which the Achaeans had set in front of the wall in order to support
it; when they had pulled these down they made sure of breaking through
the wall, but the Danaans still showed no sign of giving ground; they
still fenced the battlements with their shields of ox-hide, and hurled
their missiles down upon the foe as soon as any came below the wall.

The two Ajaxes went about everywhere on the walls cheering on the
Achaeans, giving fair words to some while they spoke sharply to any
one whom they saw to be remiss. "My friends," they cried, "Argives
one and all- good bad and indifferent, for there was never fight yet,
in which all were of equal prowess- there is now work enough, as you
very well know, for all of you. See that you none of you turn in flight
towards the ships, daunted by the shouting of the foe, but press forward
and keep one another in heart, if it may so be that Olympian Jove
the lord of lightning will vouchsafe us to repel our foes, and drive
them back towards the city." 

Thus did the two go about shouting and cheering the Achaeans on. As
the flakes that fall thick upon a winter's day, when Jove is minded
to snow and to display these his arrows to mankind- he lulls the wind
to rest, and snows hour after hour till he has buried the tops of
the high mountains, the headlands that jut into the sea, the grassy
plains, and the tilled fields of men; the snow lies deep upon the
forelands, and havens of the grey sea, but the waves as they come
rolling in stay it that it can come no further, though all else is
wrapped as with a mantle so heavy are the heavens with snow- even
thus thickly did the stones fall on one side and on the other, some
thrown at the Trojans, and some by the Trojans at the Achaeans; and
the whole wall was in an uproar. 

Still the Trojans and brave Hector would not yet have broken down
the gates and the great bar, had not Jove turned his son Sarpedon
against the Argives as a lion against a herd of horned cattle. Before
him he held his shield of hammered bronze, that the smith had beaten
so fair and round, and had lined with ox hides which he had made fast
with rivets of gold all round the shield; this he held in front of
him, and brandishing his two spears came on like some lion of the
wilderness, who has been long famished for want of meat and will dare
break even into a well-fenced homestead to try and get at the sheep.
He may find the shepherds keeping watch over their flocks with dogs
and spears, but he is in no mind to be driven from the fold till he
has had a try for it; he will either spring on a sheep and carry it
off, or be hit by a spear from strong hand- even so was Sarpedon fain
to attack the wall and break down its battlements. Then he said to
Glaucus son of Hippolochus, "Glaucus, why in Lycia do we receive especial
honour as regards our place at table? Why are the choicest portions
served us and our cups kept brimming, and why do men look up to us
as though we were gods? Moreover we hold a large estate by the banks
of the river Xanthus, fair with orchard lawns and wheat-growing land;
it becomes us, therefore, to take our stand at the head of all the
Lycians and bear the brunt of the fight, that one may say to another,
Our princes in Lycia eat the fat of the land and drink best of wine,
but they are fine fellows; they fight well and are ever at the front
in battle.' My good friend, if, when we were once out of this fight,
we could escape old age and death thenceforward and for ever, I should
neither press forward myself nor bid you do so, but death in ten thousand
shapes hangs ever over our heads, and no man can elude him; therefore
let us go forward and either win glory for ourselves, or yield it
to another." 

Glaucus heeded his saying, and the pair forthwith led on the host
of Lycians. Menestheus son of Peteos was dismayed when he saw them,
for it was against his part of the wall that they came- bringing destruction
with them; he looked along the wall for some chieftain to support
his comrades and saw the two Ajaxes, men ever eager for the fray,
and Teucer, who had just come from his tent, standing near them; but
he could not make his voice heard by shouting to them, so great an
uproar was there from crashing shields and helmets and the battering
of gates with a din which reached the skies. For all the gates had
been closed, and the Trojans were hammering at them to try and break
their way through them. Menestheus, therefore, sent Thootes with a
message to Ajax. "Run, good Thootes," said and call Ajax, or better
still bid both come, for it will be all over with us here directly;
the leaders of the Lycians are upon us, men who have ever fought desperately
heretofore. But if the have too much on their hands to let them come,
at any rate let Ajax son of Telamon do so, and let Teucer the famous
bowman come with him." 

The messenger did as he was told, and set off running along the wall
of the Achaeans. When he reached the Ajaxes he said to them, "Sirs,
princes of the Argives, the son of noble Peteos bids you come to him
for a while and help him. You had better both come if you can, or
it will be all over with him directly; the leaders of the Lycians
are upon him, men who have ever fought desperately heretofore; if
you have too much on your hands to let both come, at any rate let
Ajax son of Telamon do so, and let Teucer the famous bowman come with
him." 

Great Ajax, son of Telamon, heeded the message, and at once spoke
to the son of Oileus. "Ajax," said he, "do you two, yourself and brave
Lycomedes, stay here and keep the Danaans in heart to fight their
hardest. I will go over yonder, and bear my part in the fray, but
I will come back here at once as soon as I have given them the help
they need." 

With this, Ajax son of Telamon set off, and Teucer his brother by
the same father went also, with Pandion to carry Teucer's bow. They
went along inside the wall, and when they came to the tower where
Menestheus was (and hard pressed indeed did they find him) the brave
captains and leaders of the Lycians were storming the battlements
as it were a thick dark cloud, fighting in close quarters, and raising
the battle-cry aloud. 

First, Ajax son of Telamon killed brave Epicles, a comrade of Sarpedon,
hitting him with a jagged stone that lay by the battlements at the
very top of the wall. As men now are, even one who is in the bloom
of youth could hardly lift it with his two hands, but Ajax raised
it high aloft and flung it down, smashing Epicles' four-crested helmet
so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell
from the high wall as though he were diving, with no more life left
in him. Then Teucer wounded Glaucus the brave son of Hippolochus as
he was coming on to attack the wall. He saw his shoulder bare and
aimed an arrow at it, which made Glaucus leave off fighting. Thereon
he sprang covertly down for fear some of the Achaeans might see that
he was wounded and taunt him. Sarpedon was stung with grief when he
saw Glaucus leave him, still he did not leave off fighting, but aimed
his spear at Alcmaon the son of Thestor and hit him. He drew his spear
back again Alcmaon came down headlong after it with his bronzed armour
rattling round him. Then Sarpedon seized the battlement in his strong
hands, and tugged at it till it an gave way together, and a breach
was made through which many might pass. 

Ajax and Teucer then both of them attacked him. Teucer hit him with
an arrow on the band that bore the shield which covered his body,
but Jove saved his son from destruction that he might not fall by
the ships' sterns. Meanwhile Ajax sprang on him and pierced his shield,
but the spear did not go clean through, though it hustled him back
that he could come on no further. He therefore retired a little space
from the battlement, yet without losing all his ground, for he still
thought to cover himself with glory. Then he turned round and shouted
to the brave Lycians saying, "Lycians, why do you thus fail me? For
all my prowess I cannot break through the wall and open a way to the
ships single-handed. Come close on behind me, for the more there are
of us the better." 

The Lycians, shamed by his rebuke, pressed closer round him who was
their counsellor their king. The Argives on their part got their men
in fighting order within the wall, and there was a deadly struggle
between them. The Lycians could not break through the wall and force
their way to the ships, nor could the Danaans drive the Lycians from
the wall now that they had once reached it. As two men, measuring-rods
in hand, quarrel about their boundaries in a field that they own in
common, and stickle for their rights though they be but in a mere
strip, even so did the battlements now serve as a bone of contention,
and they beat one another's round shields for their possession. Many
a man's body was wounded with the pitiless bronze, as he turned round
and bared his back to the foe, and many were struck clean through
their shields; the wall and battlements were everywhere deluged with
the blood alike of Trojans and of Achaeans. But even so the Trojans
could not rout the Achaeans, who still held on; and as some honest
hard-working woman weighs wool in her balance and sees that the scales
be true, for she would gain some pitiful earnings for her little ones,
even so was the fight balanced evenly between them till the time came
when Jove gave the greater glory to Hector son of Priam, who was first
to spring towards the wall of the Achaeans. As he did so, he cried
aloud to the Trojans, "Up, Trojans, break the wall of the Argives,
and fling fire upon their ships." 

Thus did he hound them on, and in one body they rushed straight at
the wall as he had bidden them, and scaled the battlements with sharp
spears in their hands. Hector laid hold of a stone that lay just outside
the gates and was thick at one end but pointed at the other; two of
the best men in a town, as men now are, could hardly raise it from
the ground and put it on to a waggon, but Hector lifted it quite easily
by himself, for the son of scheming Saturn made it light for him.
As a shepherd picks up a ram's fleece with one hand and finds it no
burden, so easily did Hector lift the great stone and drive it right
at the doors that closed the gates so strong and so firmly set. These
doors were double and high, and were kept closed by two cross-bars
to which there was but one key. When he had got close up to them,
Hector strode towards them that his blow might gain in force and struck
them in the middle, leaning his whole weight against them. He broke
both hinges, and the stone fell inside by reason of its great weight.
The portals re-echoed with the sound, the bars held no longer, and
the doors flew open, one one way, and the other the other, through
the force of the blow. Then brave Hector leaped inside with a face
as dark as that of flying night. The gleaming bronze flashed fiercely
about his body and he had tow spears in his hand. None but a god could
have withstood him as he flung himself into the gateway, and his eyes
glared like fire. Then he turned round towards the Trojans and called
on them to scale the wall, and they did as he bade them- some of them
at once climbing over the wall, while others passed through the gates.
The Danaans then fled panic-stricken towards their ships, and all
was uproar and confusion. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIII

Now when Jove had thus brought Hector and the Trojans to the ships,
he left them to their never-ending toil, and turned his keen eyes
away, looking elsewhither towards the horse-breeders of Thrace, the
Mysians, fighters at close quarters, the noble Hippemolgi, who live
on milk, and the Abians, justest of mankind. He no longer turned so
much as a glance towards Troy, for he did not think that any of the
immortals would go and help either Trojans or Danaans. 

But King Neptune had kept no blind look-out; he had been looking admiringly
on the battle from his seat on the topmost crests of wooded Samothrace,
whence he could see all Ida, with the city of Priam and the ships
of the Achaeans. He had come from under the sea and taken his place
here, for he pitied the Achaeans who were being overcome by the Trojans;
and he was furiously angry with Jove. 

Presently he came down from his post on the mountain top, and as he
strode swiftly onwards the high hills and the forest quaked beneath
the tread of his immortal feet. Three strides he took, and with the
fourth he reached his goal- Aegae, where is his glittering golden
palace, imperishable, in the depths of the sea. When he got there,
he yoked his fleet brazen-footed steeds with their manes of gold all
flying in the wind; he clothed himself in raiment of gold, grasped
his gold whip, and took his stand upon his chariot. As he went his
way over the waves the sea-monsters left their lairs, for they knew
their lord, and came gambolling round him from every quarter of the
deep, while the sea in her gladness opened a path before his chariot.
So lightly did the horses fly that the bronze axle of the car was
not even wet beneath it; and thus his bounding steeds took him to
the ships of the Achaeans. 

Now there is a certain huge cavern in the depths of the sea midway
between Tenedos and rocky Imbrus; here Neptune lord of the earthquake
stayed his horses, unyoked them, and set before them their ambrosial
forage. He hobbled their feet with hobbles of gold which none could
either unloose or break, so that they might stay there in that place
until their lord should return. This done he went his way to the host
of the Achaeans. 

Now the Trojans followed Hector son of Priam in close array like a
storm-cloud or flame of fire, fighting with might and main and raising
the cry battle; for they deemed that they should take the ships of
the Achaeans and kill all their chiefest heroes then and there. Meanwhile
earth-encircling Neptune lord of the earthquake cheered on the Argives,
for he had come up out of the sea and had assumed the form and voice
of Calchas. 

First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, who were doing their best already,
and said, "Ajaxes, you two can be the saving of the Achaeans if you
will put out all your strength and not let yourselves be daunted.
I am not afraid that the Trojans, who have got over the wall in force,
will be victorious in any other part, for the Achaeans can hold all
of them in check, but I much fear that some evil will befall us here
where furious Hector, who boasts himself the son of great Jove himself,
is leading them on like a pillar of flame. May some god, then, put
it into your hearts to make a firm stand here, and to incite others
to do the like. In this case you will drive him from the ships even
though he be inspired by Jove himself." 

As he spoke the earth-encircling lord of the earthquake struck both
of them with his sceptre and filled their hearts with daring. He made
their legs light and active, as also their hands and their feet. Then,
as the soaring falcon poises on the wing high above some sheer rock,
and presently swoops down to chase some bird over the plain, even
so did Neptune lord of the earthquake wing his flight into the air
and leave them. Of the two, swift Ajax son of Oileus was the first
to know who it was that had been speaking with them, and said to Ajax
son of Telamon, "Ajax, this is one of the gods that dwell on Olympus,
who in the likeness of the prophet is bidding us fight hard by our
ships. It was not Calchas the seer and diviner of omens; I knew him
at once by his feet and knees as he turned away, for the gods are
soon recognised. Moreover I feel the lust of battle burn more fiercely
within me, while my hands and my feet under me are more eager for
the fray." 

And Ajax son of Telamon answered, "I too feel my hands grasp my spear
more firmly; my strength is greater, and my feet more nimble; I long,
moreover, to meet furious Hector son of Priam, even in single combat."

Thus did they converse, exulting in the hunger after battle with which
the god had filled them. Meanwhile the earth-encircler roused the
Achaeans, who were resting in the rear by the ships overcome at once
by hard fighting and by grief at seeing that the Trojans had got over
the wall in force. Tears began falling from their eyes as they beheld
them, for they made sure that they should not escape destruction;
but the lord of the earthquake passed lightly about among them and
urged their battalions to the front. 

First he went up to Teucer and Leitus, the hero Peneleos, and Thoas
and Deipyrus; Meriones also and Antilochus, valiant warriors; all
did he exhort. "Shame on you young Argives," he cried, "it was on
your prowess I relied for the saving of our ships; if you fight not
with might and main, this very day will see us overcome by the Trojans.
Of a truth my eyes behold a great and terrible portent which I had
never thought to see- the Trojans at our ships- they, who were heretofore
like panic-stricken hinds, the prey of jackals and wolves in a forest,
with no strength but in flight for they cannot defend themselves.
Hitherto the Trojans dared not for one moment face the attack of the
Achaeans, but now they have sallied far from their city and are fighting
at our very ships through the cowardice of our leader and the disaffection
of the people themselves, who in their discontent care not to fight
in defence of the ships but are being slaughtered near them. True,
King Agamemnon son of Atreus is the cause of our disaster by having
insulted the son of Peleus, still this is no reason why we should
leave off fighting. Let us be quick to heal, for the hearts of the
brave heal quickly. You do ill to be thus remiss, you, who are the
finest soldiers in our whole army. I blame no man for keeping out
of battle if he is a weakling, but I am indignant with such men as
you are. My good friends, matters will soon become even worse through
this slackness; think, each one of you, of his own honour and credit,
for the hazard of the fight is extreme. Great Hector is now fighting
at our ships; he has broken through the gates and the strong bolt
that held them." 

Thus did the earth-encircler address the Achaeans and urge them on.
Thereon round the two Ajaxes there gathered strong bands of men, of
whom not even Mars nor Minerva, marshaller of hosts could make light
if they went among them, for they were the picked men of all those
who were now awaiting the onset of Hector and the Trojans. They made
a living fence, spear to spear, shield to shield, buckler to buckler,
helmet to helmet, and man to man. The horse-hair crests on their gleaming
helmets touched one another as they nodded forward, so closely seffied
were they; the spears they brandished in their strong hands were interlaced,
and their hearts were set on battle. 

The Trojans advanced in a dense body, with Hector at their head pressing
right on as a rock that comes thundering down the side of some mountain
from whose brow the winter torrents have torn it; the foundations
of the dull thing have been loosened by floods of rain, and as it
bounds headlong on its way it sets the whole forest in an uproar;
it swerves neither to right nor left till it reaches level ground,
but then for all its fury it can go no further- even so easily did
Hector for a while seem as though he would career through the tents
and ships of the Achaeans till he had reached the sea in his murderous
course; but the closely serried battalions stayed him when he reached
them, for the sons of the Achaeans thrust at him with swords and spears
pointed at both ends, and drove him from them so that he staggered
and gave ground; thereon he shouted to the Trojans, "Trojans, Lycians,
and Dardanians, fighters in close combat, stand firm: the Achaeans
have set themselves as a wall against me, but they will not check
me for long; they will give ground before me if the mightiest of the
gods, the thundering spouse of Juno, has indeed inspired my onset."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Deiphobus son
of Priam went about among them intent on deeds of daring with his
round shield before him, under cover of which he strode quickly forward.
Meriones took aim at him with a spear, nor did he fail to hit the
broad orb of ox-hide; but he was far from piercing it for the spear
broke in two pieces long ere he could do so; moreover Deiphobus had
seen it coming and had held his shield well away from him. Meriones
drew back under cover of his comrades, angry alike at having failed
to vanquish Deiphobus, and having broken his spear. He turned therefore
towards the ships and tents to fetch a spear which he had left behind
in his tent. 

The others continued fighting, and the cry of battle rose up into
the heavens. Teucer son of Telamon was the first to kill his man,
to wit, the warrior Imbrius son of Mentor rich in horses. Until the
Achaeans came he had lived in Pedaeum, and had married Medesicaste
a bastard daughter of Priam; but on the arrival of the Danaan fleet
he had gone back to Ilius, and was a great man among the Trojans,
dwelling near Priam himself, who gave him like honour with his own
sons. The son of Telamon now struck him under the ear with a spear
which he then drew back again, and Imbrius fell headlong as an ash-tree
when it is felled on the crest of some high mountain beacon, and its
delicate green foliage comes toppling down to the ground. Thus did
he fall with his bronze-dight armour ringing harshly round him, and
Teucer sprang forward with intent to strip him of his armour; but
as he was doing so, Hector took aim at him with a spear. Teucer saw
the spear coming and swerved aside, whereon it hit Amphimachus, son
of Cteatus son of Actor, in the chest as he was coming into battle,
and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Hector sprang forward to take Amphimachus's helmet from off his temples,
and in a moment Ajax threw a spear at him, but did not wound him,
for he was encased all over in his terrible armour; nevertheless the
spear struck the boss of his shield with such force as to drive him
back from the two corpses, which the Achaeans then drew off. Stichius
and Menestheus, captains of the Athenians, bore away Amphimachus to
the host of the Achaeans, while the two brave and impetuous Ajaxes
did the like by Imbrius. As two lions snatch a goat from the hounds
that have it in their fangs, and bear it through thick brushwood high
above the ground in their jaws, thus did the Ajaxes bear aloft the
body of Imbrius, and strip it of its armour. Then the son of Oileus
severed the head from the neck in revenge for the death of Amphimachus,
and sent it whirling over the crowd as though it had been a ball,
till fell in the dust at Hector's feet. 

Neptune was exceedingly angry that his grandson Amphimachus should
have fallen; he therefore went to the tents and ships of the Achaeans
to urge the Danaans still further, and to devise evil for the Trojans.
Idomeneus met him, as he was taking leave of a comrade, who had just
come to him from the fight, wounded in the knee. His fellow-soldiers
bore him off the field, and Idomeneus having given orders to the physicians
went on to his tent, for he was still thirsting for battle. Neptune
spoke in the likeness and with the voice of Thoas son of Andraemon
who ruled the Aetolians of all Pleuron and high Calydon, and was honoured
among his people as though he were a god. "Idomeneus," said he, "lawgiver
to the Cretans, what has now become of the threats with which the
sons of the Achaeans used to threaten the Trojans?" 

And Idomeneus chief among the Cretans answered, "Thoas, no one, so
far as I know, is in fault, for we can all fight. None are held back
neither by fear nor slackness, but it seems to be the of almighty
Jove that the Achaeans should perish ingloriously here far from Argos:
you, Thoas, have been always staunch, and you keep others in heart
if you see any fail in duty; be not then remiss now, but exhort all
to do their utmost." 

To this Neptune lord of the earthquake made answer, "Idomeneus, may
he never return from Troy, but remain here for dogs to batten upon,
who is this day wilfully slack in fighting. Get your armour and go,
we must make all haste together if we may be of any use, though we
are only two. Even cowards gain courage from companionship, and we
two can hold our own with the bravest." 

Therewith the god went back into the thick of the fight, and Idomeneus
when he had reached his tent donned his armour, grasped his two spears,
and sallied forth. As the lightning which the son of Saturn brandishes
from bright Olympus when he would show a sign to mortals, and its
gleam flashes far and wide- even so did his armour gleam about him
as he ran. Meriones his sturdy squire met him while he was still near
his tent (for he was going to fetch his spear) and Idomeneus said

"Meriones, fleet son of Molus, best of comrades, why have you left
the field? Are you wounded, and is the point of the weapon hurting
you? or have you been sent to fetch me? I want no fetching; I had
far rather fight than stay in my tent." 

"Idomeneus," answered Meriones, "I come for a spear, if I can find
one in my tent; I have broken the one I had, in throwing it at the
shield of Deiphobus." 

And Idomeneus captain of the Cretans answered, "You will find one
spear, or twenty if you so please, standing up against the end wall
of my tent. I have taken them from Trojans whom I have killed, for
I am not one to keep my enemy at arm's length; therefore I have spears,
bossed shields, helmets, and burnished corslets." 

Then Meriones said, "I too in my tent and at my ship have spoils taken
from the Trojans, but they are not at hand. I have been at all times
valorous, and wherever there has been hard fighting have held my own
among the foremost. There may be those among the Achaeans who do not
know how I fight, but you know it well enough yourself."

Idomeneus answered, "I know you for a brave man: you need not tell
me. If the best men at the ships were being chosen to go on an ambush-
and there is nothing like this for showing what a man is made of;
it comes out then who is cowardly and who brave; the coward will change
colour at every touch and turn; he is full of fears, and keeps shifting
his weight first on one knee and then on the other; his heart beats
fast as he thinks of death, and one can hear the chattering of his
teeth; whereas the brave man will not change colour nor be on finding
himself in ambush, but is all the time longing to go into action-
if the best men were being chosen for such a service, no one could
make light of your courage nor feats of arms. If you were struck by
a dart or smitten in close combat, it would not be from behind, in
your neck nor back, but the weapon would hit you in the chest or belly
as you were pressing forward to a place in the front ranks. But let
us no longer stay here talking like children, lest we be ill spoken
of; go, fetch your spear from the tent at once." 

On this Meriones, peer of Mars, went to the tent and got himself a
spear of bronze. He then followed after Idomeneus, big with great
deeds of valour. As when baneful Mars sallies forth to battle, and
his son Panic so strong and dauntless goes with him, to strike terror
even into the heart of a hero- the pair have gone from Thrace to arm
themselves among the Ephyri or the brave Phlegyans, but they will
not listen to both the contending hosts, and will give victory to
one side or to the other- even so did Meriones and Idomeneus, captains
of men, go out to battle clad in their bronze armour. Meriones was
first to speak. "Son of Deucalion," said he, "where would you have
us begin fighting? On the right wing of the host, in the centre, or
on the left wing, where I take it the Achaeans will be weakest?"

Idomeneus answered, "There are others to defend the centre- the two
Ajaxes and Teucer, who is the finest archer of all the Achaeans, and
is good also in a hand-to-hand fight. These will give Hector son of
Priam enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish
their indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of Saturn
fling a firebrand upon them with his own hand. Great Ajax son of Telamon
will yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of
Ceres, if bronze and great stones can overthrow him. He would not
yield even to Achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of
foot there is none to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the
left wing, that we may know forthwith whether we are to give glory
to some other, or he to us." 

Meriones, peer of fleet Mars, then led the way till they came to the
part of the host which Idomeneus had named. 

Now when the Trojans saw Idomeneus coming on like a flame of fire,
him and his squire clad in their richly wrought armour, they shouted
and made towards him all in a body, and a furious hand-to-hand fight
raged under the ships' sterns. Fierce as the shrill winds that whistle
upon a day when dust lies deep on the roads, and the gusts raise it
into a thick cloud- even such was the fury of the combat, and might
and main did they hack at each other with spear and sword throughout
the host. The field bristled with the long and deadly spears which
they bore. Dazzling was the sheen of their gleaming helmets, their
fresh-burnished breastplates, and glittering shields as they joined
battle with one another. Iron indeed must be his courage who could
take pleasure in the sight of such a turmoil, and look on it without
being dismayed. 

Thus did the two mighty sons of Saturn devise evil for mortal heroes.
Jove was minded to give victory to the Trojans and to Hector, so as
to do honour to fleet Achilles, nevertheless he did not mean to utterly
overthrow the Achaean host before Ilius, and only wanted to glorify
Thetis and her valiant son. Neptune on the other hand went about among
the Argives to incite them, having come up from the grey sea in secret,
for he was grieved at seeing them vanquished by the Trojans, and was
furiously angry with Jove. Both were of the same race and country,
but Jove was elder born and knew more, therefore Neptune feared to
defend the Argives openly, but in the likeness of man, he kept on
encouraging them throughout their host. Thus, then, did these two
devise a knot of war and battle, that none could unloose or break,
and set both sides tugging at it, to the failing of men's knees beneath
them. 

And now Idomeneus, though his hair was already flecked with grey,
called loud on the Danaans and spread panic among the Trojans as he
leaped in among them. He slew Othryoneus from Cabesus, a sojourner,
who had but lately come to take part in the war. He sought Cassandra
the fairest of Priam's daughters in marriage, but offered no gifts
of wooing, for he promised a great thing, to wit, that he would drive
the sons of the Achaeans willy nilly from Troy; old King Priam had
given his consent and promised her to him, whereon he fought on the
strength of the promises thus made to him. Idomeneus aimed a spear,
and hit him as he came striding on. His cuirass of bronze did not
protect him, and the spear stuck in his belly, so that he fell heavily
to the ground. Then Idomeneus vaunted over him saying, "Othryoneus,
there is no one in the world whom I shall admire more than I do you,
if you indeed perform what you have promised Priam son of Dardanus
in return for his daughter. We too will make you an offer; we will
give you the loveliest daughter of the son of Atreus, and will bring
her from Argos for you to marry, if you will sack the goodly city
of Ilius in company with ourselves; so come along with me, that we
may make a covenant at the ships about the marriage, and we will not
be hard upon you about gifts of wooing." 

With this Idomeneus began dragging him by the foot through the thick
of the fight, but Asius came up to protect the body, on foot, in front
of his horses which his esquire drove so close behind him that he
could feel their 'breath upon his shoulder. He was longing to strike
down Idomeneus, but ere he could do so Idomeneus smote him with his
spear in the throat under the chin, and the bronze point went clean
through it. He fell as an oak, or poplar, or pine which shipwrights
have felled for ship's timber upon the mountains with whetted axes-
even thus did he lie full length in front of his chariot and horses,
grinding his teeth and clutching at the bloodstained just. His charioteer
was struck with panic and did not dare turn his horses round and escape:
thereupon Antilochus hit him in the middle of his body with a spear;
his cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and the spear stuck in
his belly. He fell gasping from his chariot and Antilochus great Nestor's
son, drove his horses from the Trojans to the Achaeans. 

Deiphobus then came close up to Idomeneus to avenge Asius, and took
aim at him with a spear, but Idomeneus was on the look-out and avoided
it, for he was covered by the round shield he always bore- a shield
of oxhide and bronze with two arm-rods on the inside. He crouched
under cover of this, and the spear flew over him, but the shield rang
out as the spear grazed it, and the weapon sped not in vain from the
strong hand of Deiphobus, for it struck Hypsenor son of Hippasus,
shepherd of his people, in the liver under the midriff, and his limbs
failed beneath him. Deiphobus vaunted over him and cried with a loud
voice saying, "Of a truth Asius has not fallen unavenied; he will
be glad even while passing into the house of Hades, strong warden
of the gate, that I have sent some one to escort him." 

Thus did he vaunt, and the Argives were stung by his saying. Noble
Antilochus was more angry than any one, but grief did not make him
forget his friend and comrade. He ran up to him, bestrode him, and
covered him with his shield; then two of his staunch comrades, Mecisteus
son of Echius, and Alastor stooped down, and bore him away groaning
heavily to the ships. But Idomeneus ceased not his fury. He kept on
striving continually either to enshroud some Trojan in the darkness
of death, or himself to fall while warding off the evil day from the
Achaeans. Then fell Alcathous son of noble Aesyetes: he was son-in-law
to Anchises, having married his eldest daughter Hippodameia who was
the darling of her father and mother, and excelled all her generation
in beauty, accomplishments, and understanding, wherefore the bravest
man in all Troy had taken her to wife- him did Neptune lay low by
the hand of Idomeneus, blinding his bright eyes and binding his strong
limbs in fetters so that he could neither go back nor to one side,
but stood stock still like pillar or lofty tree when Idomeneus struck
him with a spear in the middle of his chest. The coat of mail that
had hitherto protected his body was now broken, and rang harshly as
the spear tore through it. He fell heavily to the ground, and the
spear stuck in his heart, which still beat, and made the butt-end
of the spear quiver till dread Mars put an end to his life. Idomeneus
vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice saying, "Deiphobus, since
you are in a mood to vaunt, shall we cry quits now that we have killed
three men to your one? Nay, sir, stand in fight with me yourself,
that you may learn what manner of Jove-begotten man am I that have
come hither. Jove first begot Minos chief ruler in Crete, and Minos
in his turn begot a son, noble Deucalion; Deucalion begot me to be
a ruler over many men in Crete, and my ships have now brought me hither,
to be the bane of yourself, your father, and the Trojans."

Thus did he speak, and Deiphobus was in two minds, whether to go back
and fetch some other Trojan to help him, or to take up the challenge
single-handed. In the end, he deemed it best to go and fetch Aeneas,
whom he found standing in the rear, for he had long been aggrieved
with Priam because in spite his brave deeds he did not give him his
due share of honour. Deiphobus went up to him and said, "Aeneas, prince
among the Trojans, if you know any ties of kinship, help me now to
defend the body of your sister's husband; come with me to the rescue
of Alcathous, who being husband to your sister brought you up when
you were a child in his house, and now Idomeneus has slain him."

With these words he moved the heart of Aeneas, and he went in pursuit
of Idomeneus, big with great deeds of valour; but Idomeneus was not
to be thus daunted as though he were a mere child; he held his ground
as a wild boar at bay upon the mountains, who abides the coming of
a great crowd of men in some lonely place- the bristles stand upright
on his back, his eyes flash fire, and he whets his tusks in his eagerness
to defend himself against hounds and men- even so did famed Idomeneus
hold his ground and budge not at the coming of Aeneas. He cried aloud
to his comrades looking towards Ascalaphus, Aphareus, Deipyrus, Meriones,
and Antilochus, all of them brave soldiers- "Hither my friends," he
cried, "and leave me not single-handed- I go in great fear by fleet
Aeneas, who is coming against me, and is a redoubtable dispenser of
death battle. Moreover he is in the flower of youth when a man's strength
is greatest; if I was of the same age as he is and in my present mind,
either he or I should soon bear away the prize of victory

On this, all of them as one man stood near him, shield on shoulder.
Aeneas on the other side called to his comrades, looking towards Deiphobus,
Paris, and Agenor, who were leaders of the Trojans along with himself,
and the people followed them as sheep follow the ram when they go
down to drink after they have been feeding, and the heart of the shepherd
is glad- even so was the heart of Aeneas gladdened when he saw his
people follow him. 

Then they fought furiously in close combat about the body of Alcathous,
wielding their long spears; and the bronze armour about their bodies
rang fearfully as they took aim at one another in the press of the
fight, while the two heroes Aeneas and Idomeneus, peers of Mars, outxied
every one in their desire to hack at each other with sword and spear.
Aeneas took aim first, but Idomeneus was on the lookout and avoided
the spear, so that it sped from Aeneas' strong hand in vain, and fell
quivering in the ground. Idomeneus meanwhile smote Oenomaus in the
middle of his belly, and broke the plate of his corslet, whereon his
bowels came gushing out and he clutched the earth in the palms of
his hands as he fell sprawling in the dust. Idomeneus drew his spear
out of the body, but could not strip him of the rest of his armour
for the rain of darts that were showered upon him: moreover his strength
was now beginning to fail him so that he could no longer charge, and
could neither spring forward to recover his own weapon nor swerve
aside to avoid one that was aimed at him; therefore, though he still
defended himself in hand-to-hand fight, his heavy feet could not bear
him swiftly out of the battle. Deiphobus aimed a spear at him as he
was retreating slowly from the field, for his bitterness against him
was as fierce as ever, but again he missed him, and hit Ascalaphus,
the son of Mars; the spear went through his shoulder, and he clutched
the earth in the palms of his hands as he fell sprawling in the dust.

Grim Mars of awful voice did not yet know that his son had fallen,
for he was sitting on the summits of Olympus under the golden clouds,
by command of Jove, where the other gods were also sitting, forbidden
to take part in the battle. Meanwhile men fought furiously about the
body. Deiphobus tore the helmet from off his head, but Meriones sprang
upon him, and struck him on the arm with a spear so that the visored
helmet fell from his hand and came ringing down upon the ground. Thereon
Meriones sprang upon him like a vulture, drew the spear from his shoulder,
and fell back under cover of his men. Then Polites, own brother of
Deiphobus passed his arms around his waist, and bore him away from
the battle till he got to his horses that were standing in the rear
of the fight with the chariot and their driver. These took him towards
the city groaning and in great pain, with the blood flowing from his
arm. 

The others still fought on, and the battle-cry rose to heaven without
ceasing. Aeneas sprang on Aphareus son of Caletor, and struck him
with a spear in his throat which was turned towards him; his head
fell on one side, his helmet and shield came down along with him,
and death, life's foe, was shed around him. Antilochus spied his chance,
flew forward towards Thoon, and wounded him as he was turning round.
He laid open the vein that runs all the way up the back to the neck;
he cut this vein clean away throughout its whole course, and Thoon
fell in the dust face upwards, stretching out his hands imploringly
towards his comrades. Antilochus sprang upon him and stripped the
armour from his shoulders, glaring round him fearfully as he did so.
The Trojans came about him on every side and struck his broad and
gleaming shield, but could not wound his body, for Neptune stood guard
over the son of Nestor, though the darts fell thickly round him. He
was never clear of the foe, but was always in the thick of the fight;
his spear was never idle; he poised and aimed it in every direction,
so eager was he to hit some one from a distance or to fight him hand
to hand. 

As he was thus aiming among the crowd, he was seen by Adamas son of
Asius, who rushed towards him and struck him with a spear in the middle
of his shield, but Neptune made its point without effect, for he grudged
him the life of Antilochus. One half, therefore, of the spear stuck
fast like a charred stake in Antilochus's shield, while the other
lay on the ground. Adamas then sought shelter under cover of his men,
but Meriones followed after and hit him with a spear midway between
the private parts and the navel, where a wound is particualrly painful
to wretched mortals. There did Meriones transfix him, and he writhed
convulsively about the spear as some bull whom mountain herdsmen have
bound with ropes of withes and are taking away perforce. Even so did
he move convulsively for a while, but not for very long, till Meriones
came up and drew the spear out of his body, and his eyes were veiled
in darkness. 

Helenus then struck Deipyrus with a great Thracian sword, hitting
him on the temple in close combat and tearing the helmet from his
head; the helmet fell to the ground, and one of those who were fighting
on the Achaean side took charge of it as it rolled at his feet, but
the eyes of Deipyrus were closed in the darkness of death.

On this Menelaus was grieved, and made menacingly towards Helenus,
brandishing his spear; but Helenus drew his bow, and the two attacked
one another at one and the same moment, the one with his spear, and
the other with his bow and arrow. The son of Priam hit the breastplate
of Menelaus's corslet, but the arrow glanced from off it. As black
beans or pulse come pattering down on to a threshing-floor from the
broad winnowing-shovel, blown by shrill winds and shaken by the shovel-
even so did the arrow glance off and recoil from the shield of Menelaus,
who in his turn wounded the hand with which Helenus carried his bow;
the spear went right through his hand and stuck in the bow itself,
so that to his life he retreated under cover of his men, with his
hand dragging by his side- for the spear weighed it down till Agenor
drew it out and bound the hand carefully up in a woollen sling which
his esquire had with him. 

Pisander then made straight at Menelaus- his evil destiny luring him
on to his doom, for he was to fall in fight with you, O Menelaus.
When the two were hard by one another the spear of the son of Atreus
turned aside and he missed his aim; Pisander then struck the shield
of brave Menelaus but could not pierce it, for the shield stayed the
spear and broke the shaft; nevertheless he was glad and made sure
of victory; forthwith, however, the son of Atreus drew his sword and
sprang upon him. Pisander then seized the bronze battle-axe, with
its long and polished handle of olive wood that hung by his side under
his shield, and the two made at one another. Pisander struck the peak
of Menelaus's crested helmet just under the crest itself, and Menelaus
hit Pisander as he was coming towards him, on the forehead, just at
the rise of his nose; the bones cracked and his two gore-bedrabbled
eyes fell by his feet in the dust. He fell backwards to the ground,
and Menelaus set his heel upon him, stripped him of his armour, and
vaunted over him saying, "Even thus shall you Trojans leave the ships
of the Achaeans, proud and insatiate of battle though you be: nor
shall you lack any of the disgrace and shame which you have heaped
upon myself. Cowardly she-wolves that you are, you feared not the
anger of dread Jove, avenger of violated hospitality, who will one
day destroy your city; you stole my wedded wife and wickedly carried
off much treasure when you were her guest, and now you would fling
fire upon our ships, and kill our heroes. A day will come when, rage
as you may, you shall be stayed. O father Jove, you, who they say
art above all both gods and men in wisdom, and from whom all things
that befall us do proceed, how can you thus favour the Trojans- men
so proud and overweening, that they are never tired of fighting? All
things pall after a while- sleep, love, sweet song, and stately dance-
still these are things of which a man would surely have his fill rather
than of battle, whereas it is of battle that the Trojans are insatiate."

So saying Menelaus stripped the blood-stained armour from the body
of Pisander, and handed it over to his men; then he again ranged himself
among those who were in the front of the fight. 

Harpalion son of King Pylaemenes then sprang upon him; he had come
to fight at Troy along with his father, but he did not go home again.
He struck the middle of Menelaus's shield with his spear but could
not pierce it, and to save his life drew back under cover of his men,
looking round him on every side lest he should be wounded. But Meriones
aimed a bronze-tipped arrow at him as he was leaving the field, and
hit him on the right buttock; the arrow pierced the bone through and
through, and penetrated the bladder, so he sat down where he was and
breathed his last in the arms of his comrades, stretched like a worm
upon the ground and watering the earth with the blood that flowed
from his wound. The brave Paphlagonians tended him with all due care;
they raised him into his chariot, and bore him sadly off to the city
of Troy; his father went also with him weeping bitterly, but there
was no ransom that could bring his dead son to life again.

Paris was deeply grieved by the death of Harpalion, who was his host
when he went among the Paphlagonians; he aimed an arrow, therefore,
in order to avenge him. Now there was a certain man named Euchenor,
son of Polyidus the prophet, a brave man and wealthy, whose home was
in Corinth. This Euchenor had set sail for Troy well knowing that
it would be the death of him, for his good old father Polyidus had
often told him that he must either stay at home and die of a terrible
disease, or go with the Achaeans and perish at the hands of the Trojans;
he chose, therefore, to avoid incurring the heavy fine the Achaeans
would have laid upon him, and at the same time to escape the pain
and suffering of disease. Paris now smote him on the jaw under his
ear, whereon the life went out of him and he was enshrouded in the
darkness of death. 

Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. But Hector had
not yet heard, and did not know that the Argives were making havoc
of his men on the left wing of the battle, where the Achaeans ere
long would have triumphed over them, so vigorously did Neptune cheer
them on and help them. He therefore held on at the point where he
had first forced his way through the gates and the wall, after breaking
through the serried ranks of Danaan warriors. It was here that the
ships of Ajax and Protesilaus were drawn up by the sea-shore; here
the wall was at its lowest, and the fight both of man and horse raged
most fiercely. The Boeotians and the Ionians with their long tunics,
the Locrians, the men of Phthia, and the famous force of the Epeans
could hardly stay Hector as he rushed on towards the ships, nor could
they drive him from them, for he was as a wall of fire. The chosen
men of the Athenians were in the van, led by Menestheus son of Peteos,
with whom were also Pheidas, Stichius, and stalwart Bias: Meges son
of Phyleus, Amphion, and Dracius commanded the Epeans, while Medon
and staunch Podarces led the men of Phthia. Of these, Medon was bastard
son to Oileus and brother of Ajax, but he lived in Phylace away from
his own country, for he had killed the brother of his stepmother Eriopis,
the wife of Oileus; the other, Podarces, was the son of Iphiclus son
of Phylacus. These two stood in the van of the Phthians, and defended
the ships along with the Boeotians. 

Ajax son of Oileus never for a moment left the side of Ajax son of
Telamon, but as two swart oxen both strain their utmost at the plough
which they are drawing in a fallow field, and the sweat steams upwards
from about the roots of their horns- nothing but the yoke divides
them as they break up the ground till they reach the end of the field-
even so did the two Ajaxes stand shoulder to shoulder by one another.
Many and brave comrades followed the son of Telamon, to relieve him
of his shield when he was overcome with sweat and toil, but the Locrians
did not follow so close after the son of Oileus, for they could not
hold their own in a hand-to-hand fight. They had no bronze helmets
with plumes of horse-hair, neither had they shields nor ashen spears,
but they had come to Troy armed with bows, and with slings of twisted
wool from which they showered their missiles to break the ranks of
the Trojans. The others, therefore, with their heavy armour bore the
brunt of the fight with the Trojans and with Hector, while the Locrians
shot from behind, under their cover; and thus the Trojans began to
lose heart, for the arrows threw them into confusion. 

The Trojans would now have been driven in sorry plight from the ships
and tents back to windy Ilius, had not Polydamas presently said to
Hector, "Hector, there is no persuading you to take advice. Because
heaven has so richly endowed you with the arts of war, you think that
you must therefore excel others in counsel; but you cannot thus claim
preeminence in all things. Heaven has made one man an excellent soldier;
of another it has made a dancer or a singer and player on the lyre;
while yet in another Jove has implanted a wise understanding of which
men reap fruit to the saving of many, and he himself knows more about
it than any one; therefore I will say what I think will be best. The
fight has hemmed you in as with a circle of fire, and even now that
the Trojans are within the wall some of them stand aloof in full armour,
while others are fighting scattered and outnumbered near the ships.
Draw back, therefore, and call your chieftains round you, that we
may advise together whether to fall now upon the ships in the hope
that heaven may vouchsafe us victory, or to beat a retreat while we
can yet safely do so. I greatly fear that the Achaeans will pay us
their debt of yesterday in full, for there is one abiding at their
ships who is never weary of battle, and who will not hold aloof much
longer." 

Thus spoke Polydamas, and his words pleased Hector well. He sprang
in full armour from his chariot and said, "Polydamas, gather the chieftains
here; I will go yonder into the fight, but will return at once when
I have given them their orders." 

He then sped onward, towering like a snowy mountain, and with a loud
cry flew through the ranks of the Trojans and their allies. When they
heard his voice they all hastened to gather round Polydamas the excellent
son of Panthous, but Hector kept on among the foremost, looking everywhere
to find Deiphobus and prince Helenus, Adamas son of Asius, and Asius
son of Hyrtacus; living, indeed, and scatheless he could no longer
find them, for the two last were lying by the sterns of the Achaean
ships, slain by the Argives, while the others had been also stricken
and wounded by them; but upon the left wing of the dread battle he
found Alexandrus, husband of lovely Helen, cheering his men and urging
them on to fight. He went up to him and upbraided him. "Paris," said
he, "evil-hearted Paris, fair to see but woman-mad and false of tongue,
where are Deiphobus and King Helenus? Where are Adamas son of Asius,
and Asius son of Hyrtacus? Where too is Othryoneus? Ilius is undone
and will now surely fall!" 

Alexandrus answered, "Hector, why find fault when there is no one
to find fault with? I should hold aloof from battle on any day rather
than this, for my mother bore me with nothing of the coward about
me. From the moment when you set our men fighting about the ships
we have been staying here and doing battle with the Danaans. Our comrades
about whom you ask me are dead; Deiphobus and King Helenus alone have
left the field, wounded both of them in the hand, but the son of Saturn
saved them alive. Now, therefore, lead on where you would have us
go, and we will follow with right goodwill; you shall not find us
fail you in so far as our strength holds out, but no man can do more
than in him lies, no matter how willing he may be." 

With these words he satisfied his brother, and the two went towards
the part of the battle where the fight was thickest, about Cebriones,
brave Polydamas, Phalces, Orthaeus, godlike Polyphetes, Palmys, Ascanius,
and Morys son of Hippotion, who had come from fertile Ascania on the
preceding day to relieve other troops. Then Jove urged them on to
fight. They flew forth like the blasts of some fierce wind that strike
earth in the van of a thunderstorm- they buffet the salt sea into
an uproar; many and mighty are the great waves that come crashing
in one after the other upon the shore with their arching heads all
crested with foam- even so did rank behind rank of Trojans arrayed
in gleaming armour follow their leaders onward. The way was led by
Hector son of Priam, peer of murderous Mars, with his round shield
before him- his shield of ox-hides covered with plates of bronze-
and his gleaming helmet upon his temples. He kept stepping forward
under cover of his shield in every direction, making trial of the
ranks to see if they would give way be him, but he could not daunt
the courage of the Achaeans. Ajax was the first to stride out and
challenge him. "Sir," he cried, "draw near; why do you think thus
vainly to dismay the Argives? We Achaeans are excellent soldiers,
but the scourge of Jove has fallen heavily upon us. Your heart, forsooth,
is set on destroying our ships, but we too have bands that can keep
you at bay, and your own fair town shall be sooner taken and sacked
by ourselves. The time is near when you shall pray Jove and all the
gods in your flight, that your steeds may be swifter than hawks as
they raise the dust on the plain and bear you back to your city."

As he was thus speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand, and the
host of the Achaeans shouted, for they took heart at the omen. But
Hector answered, "Ajax, braggart and false of tongue, would that I
were as sure of being son for evermore to aegis-bearing Jove, with
Queen Juno for my mother, and of being held in like honour with Minerva
and Apollo, as I am that this day is big with the destruction of the
Achaeans; and you shall fall among them if you dare abide my spear;
it shall rend your fair body and bid you glut our hounds and birds
of prey with your fat and your flesh, as you fall by the ships of
the Achaeans." 

With these words he led the way and the others followed after with
a cry that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them. The Argives
on their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their prowess,
but stood firm against the onslaught of the Trojan chieftains, and
the cry from both the hosts rose up to heaven and to the brightness
of Jove's presence. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIV

Nestor was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not escape
him, and he said to the son of Aesculapius, "What, noble Machaon,
is the meaning of all this? The shouts of men fighting by our ships
grow stronger and stronger; stay here, therefore, and sit over your
wine, while fair Hecamede heats you a bath and washes the clotted
blood from off you. I will go at once to the look-out station and
see what it is all about." 

As he spoke he took up the shield of his son Thrasymedes that was
lying in his tent, all gleaming with bronze, for Thrasymedes had taken
his father's shield; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear,
and as soon as he was outside saw the disastrous rout of the Achaeans
who, now that their wall was overthrown, were flying pell-mell before
the Trojans. As when there is a heavy swell upon the sea, but the
waves are dumb- they keep their eyes on the watch for the quarter
whence the fierce winds may spring upon them, but they stay where
they are and set neither this way nor that, till some particular wind
sweeps down from heaven to determine them- even so did the old man
ponder whether to make for the crowd of Danaans, or go in search of
Agamemnon. In the end he deemed it best to go to the son of Atreus;
but meanwhile the hosts were fighting and killing one another, and
the hard bronze rattled on their bodies, as they thrust at one another
with their swords and spears. 

The wounded kings, the son of Tydeus, Ulysses, and Agamemnon son of
Atreus, fell in Nestor as they were coming up from their ships- for
theirs were drawn up some way from where the fighting was going on,
being on the shore itself inasmuch as they had been beached first,
while the wall had been built behind the hindermost. The stretch of
the shore, wide though it was, did not afford room for all the ships,
and the host was cramped for space, therefore they had placed the
ships in rows one behind the other, and had filled the whole opening
of the bay between the two points that formed it. The kings, leaning
on their spears, were coming out to survey the fight, being in great
anxiety, and when old Nestor met them they were filled with dismay.
Then King Agamemnon said to him, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to
the Achaean name, why have you left the battle to come hither? I fear
that what dread Hector said will come true, when he vaunted among
the Trojans saying that he would not return to Ilius till he had fired
our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it is all coming
true. Alas! others of the Achaeans, like Achilles, are in anger with
me that they refuse to fight by the sterns of our ships."

Then Nestor knight of Gerene answered, "It is indeed as you say; it
is all coming true at this moment, and even Jove who thunders from
on high cannot prevent it. Fallen is the wall on which we relied as
an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet. The Trojans are
fighting stubbornly and without ceasing at the ships; look where you
may you cannot see from what quarter the rout of the Achaeans is coming;
they are being killed in a confused mass and the battle-cry ascends
to heaven; let us think, if counsel can be of any use, what we had
better do; but I do not advise our going into battle ourselves, for
a man cannot fight when he is wounded." 

And King Agamemnon answered, "Nestor, if the Trojans are indeed fighting
at the rear of our ships, and neither the wall nor the trench has
served us- over which the Danaans toiled so hard, and which they deemed
would be an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet- I see it
must be the will of Jove that the Achaeans should perish ingloriously
here, far from Argos. I knew when Jove was willing to defend us, and
I know now that he is raising the Trojans to like honour with the
gods, while us, on the other hand, he bas bound hand and foot. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say; let us bring down the ships that
are on the beach and draw them into the water; let us make them fast
to their mooring-stones a little way out, against the fall of night-
if even by night the Trojans will desist from fighting; we may then
draw down the rest of the fleet. There is nothing wrong in flying
ruin even by night. It is better for a man that he should fly and
be saved than be caught and killed." 

Ulysses looked fiercely at him and said, "Son of Atreus, what are
you talking about? Wretch, you should have commanded some other and
baser army, and not been ruler over us to whom Jove has allotted a
life of hard fighting from youth to old age, till we every one of
us perish. Is it thus that you would quit the city of Troy, to win
which we have suffered so much hardship? Hold your peace, lest some
other of the Achaeans hear you say what no man who knows how to give
good counsel, no king over so great a host as that of the Argives
should ever have let fall from his lips. I despise your judgement
utterly for what you have been saying. Would you, then, have us draw
down our ships into the water while the battle is raging, and thus
play further into the hands of the conquering Trojans? It would be
ruin; the Achaeans will not go on fighting when they see the ships
being drawn into the water, but will cease attacking and keep turning
their eyes towards them; your counsel, therefore, Sir captain, would
be our destruction." 

Agamemnon answered, "Ulysses, your rebuke has stung me to the heart.
I am not, however, ordering the Achaeans to draw their ships into
the sea whether they will or no. Some one, it may be, old or young,
can offer us better counsel which I shall rejoice to hear."

Then said Diomed, "Such an one is at hand; he is not far to seek,
if you will listen to me and not resent my speaking though I am younger
than any of you. I am by lineage son to a noble sire, Tydeus, who
lies buried at Thebes. For Portheus had three noble sons, two of whom,
Agrius and Melas, abode in Pleuron and rocky Calydon. The third was
the knight Oeneus, my father's father, and he was the most valiant
of them all. Oeeneus remained in his own country, but my father (as
Jove and the other gods ordained it) migrated to Argos. He married
into the family of Adrastus, and his house was one of great abundance,
for he had large estates of rich corn-growing land, with much orchard
ground as well, and he had many sheep; moreover he excelled all the
Argives in the use of the spear. You must yourselves have heard whether
these things are true or no; therefore when I say well despise not
my words as though I were a coward or of ignoble birth. I say, then,
let us go to the fight as we needs must, wounded though we be. When
there, we may keep out of the battle and beyond the range of the spears
lest we get fresh wounds in addition to what we have already, but
we can spur on others, who have been indulging their spleen and holding
aloof from battle hitherto." 

Thus did he speak; whereon they did even as he had said and set out,
King Agamemnon leading the way. 

Meanwhile Neptune had kept no blind look-out, and came up to them
in the semblance of an old man. He took Agamemnon's right hand in
his own and said, "Son of Atreus, I take it Achilles is glad now that
he sees the Achaeans routed and slain, for he is utterly without remorse-
may he come to a bad end and heaven confound him. As for yourself,
the blessed gods are not yet so bitterly angry with you but that the
princes and counsellors of the Trojans shall again raise the dust
upon the plain, and you shall see them flying from the ships and tents
towards their city." 

With this he raised a mighty cry of battle, and sped forward to the
plain. The voice that came from his deep chest was as that of nine
or ten thousand men when they are shouting in the thick of a fight,
and it put fresh courage into the hearts of the Achaeans to wage war
and do battle without ceasing. 

Juno of the golden throne looked down as she stood upon a peak of
Olympus and her heart was gladdened at the sight of him who was at
once her brother and her brother-in-law, hurrying hither and thither
amid the fighting. Then she turned her eyes to Jove as he sat on the
topmost crests of many-fountained Ida, and loathed him. She set herself
to think how she might hoodwink him, and in the end she deemed that
it would be best for her to go to Ida and array herself in rich attire,
in the hope that Jove might become enamoured of her, and wish to embrace
her. While he was thus engaged a sweet and careless sleep might be
made to steal over his eyes and senses. 

She went, therefore, to the room which her son Vulcan had made her,
and the doors of which he had cunningly fastened by means of a secret
key so that no other god could open them. Here she entered and closed
the doors behind her. She cleansed all the dirt from her fair body
with ambrosia, then she anointed herself with olive oil, ambrosial,
very soft, and scented specially for herself- if it were so much as
shaken in the bronze-floored house of Jove, the scent pervaded the
universe of heaven and earth. With this she anointed her delicate
skin, and then she plaited the fair ambrosial locks that flowed in
a stream of golden tresses from her immortal head. She put on the
wondrous robe which Minerva had worked for her with consummate art,
and had embroidered with manifold devices; she fastened it about her
bosom with golden clasps, and she girded herself with a girdle that
had a hundred tassels: then she fastened her earrings, three brilliant
pendants that glistened most beautifully, through the pierced lobes
of her ears, and threw a lovely new veil over her head. She bound
her sandals on to her feet, and when she had arrayed herself perfectly
to her satisfaction, she left her room and called Venus to come aside
and speak to her. "My dear child," said she, "will you do what I am
going to ask of you, or will refuse me because you are angry at my
being on the Danaan side, while you are on the Trojan?" 

Jove's daughter Venus answered, "Juno, august queen of goddesses,
daughter of mighty Saturn, say what you want, and I will do it for
at once, if I can, and if it can be done at all." 

Then Juno told her a lying tale and said, "I want you to endow me
with some of those fascinating charms, the spells of which bring all
things mortal and immortal to your feet. I am going to the world's
end to visit Oceanus (from whom all we gods proceed) and mother Tethys:
they received me in their house, took care of me, and brought me up,
having taken me over from Rhaea when Jove imprisoned great Saturn
in the depths that are under earth and sea. I must go and see them
that I may make peace between them; they have been quarrelling, and
are so angry that they have not slept with one another this long while;
if I can bring them round and restore them to one another's embraces,
they will be grateful to me and love me for ever afterwards."

Thereon laughter-loving Venus said, "I cannot and must not refuse
you, for you sleep in the arms of Jove who is our king."

As she spoke she loosed from her bosom the curiously embroidered girdle
into which all her charms had been wrought- love, desire, and that
sweet flattery which steals the judgement even of the most prudent.
She gave the girdle to Juno and said, "Take this girdle wherein all
my charms reside and lay it in your bosom. If you will wear it I promise
you that your errand, be it what it may, will not be bootless."

When she heard this Juno smiled, and still smiling she laid the girdle
in her bosom. 

Venus now went back into the house of Jove, while Juno darted down
from the summits of Olympus. She passed over Pieria and fair Emathia,
and went on and on till she came to the snowy ranges of the Thracian
horsemen, over whose topmost crests she sped without ever setting
foot to ground. When she came to Athos she went on over the, waves
of the sea till she reached Lemnos, the city of noble Thoas. There
she met Sleep, own brother to Death, and caught him by the hand, saying,
"Sleep, you who lord it alike over mortals and immortals, if you ever
did me a service in times past, do one for me now, and I shall be
grateful to you ever after. Close Jove's keen eyes for me in slumber
while I hold him clasped in my embrace, and I will give you a beautiful
golden seat, that can never fall to pieces; my clubfooted son Vulcan
shall make it for you, and he shall give it a footstool for you to
rest your fair feet upon when you are at table." 

Then Sleep answered, "Juno, great queen of goddesses, daughter of
mighty Saturn, I would lull any other of the gods to sleep without
compunction, not even excepting the waters of Oceanus from whom all
of them proceed, but I dare not go near Jove, nor send him to sleep
unless he bids me. I have had one lesson already through doing what
you asked me, on the day when Jove's mighty son Hercules set sail
from Ilius after having sacked the city of the Trojans. At your bidding
I suffused my sweet self over the mind of aegis-bearing Jove, and
laid him to rest; meanwhile you hatched a plot against Hercules, and
set the blasts of the angry winds beating upon the sea, till you took
him to the goodly city of Cos away from all his friends. Jove was
furious when he awoke, and began hurling the gods about all over the
house; he was looking more particularly for myself, and would have
flung me down through space into the sea where I should never have
been heard of any more, had not Night who cows both men and gods protected
me. I fled to her and Jove left off looking for me in spite of his
being so angry, for he did not dare do anything to displease Night.
And now you are again asking me to do something on which I cannot
venture." 

And Juno said, "Sleep, why do you take such notions as those into
your head? Do you think Jove will be as anxious to help the Trojans,
as he was about his own son? Come, I will marry you to one of the
youngest of the Graces, and she shall be your own- Pasithea, whom
you have always wanted to marry." 

Sleep was pleased when he heard this, and answered, "Then swear it
to me by the dread waters of the river Styx; lay one hand on the bounteous
earth, and the other on the sheen of the sea, so that all the gods
who dwell down below with Saturn may be our witnesses, and see that
you really do give me one of the youngest of the Graces- Pasithea,
whom I have always wanted to marry." 

Juno did as he had said. She swore, and invoked all the gods of the
nether world, who are called Titans, to witness. When she had completed
her oath, the two enshrouded themselves in a thick mist and sped lightly
forward, leaving Lemnos and Imbrus behind them. Presently they reached
many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, and Lectum where they
left the sea to go on by land, and the tops of the trees of the forest
soughed under the going of their feet. Here Sleep halted, and ere
Jove caught sight of him he climbed a lofty pine-tree- the tallest
that reared its head towards heaven on all Ida. He hid himself behind
the branches and sat there in the semblance of the sweet-singing bird
that haunts the mountains and is called Chalcis by the gods, but men
call it Cymindis. Juno then went to Gargarus, the topmost peak of
Ida, and Jove, driver of the clouds, set eyes upon her. As soon as
he did so he became inflamed with the same passionate desire for her
that he had felt when they had first enjoyed each other's embraces,
and slept with one another without their dear parents knowing anything
about it. He went up to her and said, "What do you want that you have
come hither from Olympus- and that too with neither chariot nor horses
to convey you?" 

Then Juno told him a lying tale and said, "I am going to the world's
end, to visit Oceanus, from whom all we gods proceed, and mother Tethys;
they received me into their house, took care of me, and brought me
up. I must go and see them that I may make peace between them: they
have been quarrelling, and are so angry that they have not slept with
one another this long time. The horses that will take me over land
and sea are stationed on the lowermost spurs of many-fountained Ida,
and I have come here from Olympus on purpose to consult you. I was
afraid you might be angry with me later on, if I went to the house
of Oceanus without letting you know." 

And Jove said, "Juno, you can choose some other time for paying your
visit to Oceanus- for the present let us devote ourselves to love
and to the enjoyment of one another. Never yet have I been so overpowered
by passion neither for goddess nor mortal woman as I am at this moment
for yourself- not even when I was in love with the wife of Ixion who
bore me Pirithous, peer of gods in counsel, nor yet with Danae the
daintily-ancled daughter of Acrisius, who bore me the famed hero Perseus.
Then there was the daughter of Phoenix, who bore me Minos and Rhadamanthus:
there was Semele, and Alcmena in Thebes by whom I begot my lion-hearted
son Hercules, while Semele became mother to Bacchus the comforter
of mankind. There was queen Ceres again, and lovely Leto, and yourself-
but with none of these was I ever so much enamoured as I now am with
you." 

Juno again answered him with a lying tale. "Most dread son of Saturn,"
she exclaimed, "what are you talking about? Would you have us enjoy
one another here on the top of Mount Ida, where everything can be
seen? What if one of the ever-living gods should see us sleeping together,
and tell the others? It would be such a scandal that when I had risen
from your embraces I could never show myself inside your house again;
but if you are so minded, there is a room which your son Vulcan has
made me, and he has given it good strong doors; if you would so have
it, let us go thither and lie down." 

And Jove answered, "Juno, you need not be afraid that either god or
man will see you, for I will enshroud both of us in such a dense golden
cloud, that the very sun for all his bright piercing beams shall not
see through it." 

With this the son of Saturn caught his wife in his embrace; whereon
the earth sprouted them a cushion of young grass, with dew-bespangled
lotus, crocus, and hyacinth, so soft and thick that it raised them
well above the ground. Here they laid themselves down and overhead
they were covered by a fair cloud of gold, from which there fell glittering
dew-drops. 

Thus, then, did the sire of all things repose peacefully on the crest
of Ida, overcome at once by sleep and love, and he held his spouse
in his arms. Meanwhile Sleep made off to the ships of the Achaeans,
to tell earth-encircling Neptune, lord of the earthquake. When he
had found him he said, "Now, Neptune, you can help the Danaans with
a will, and give them victory though it be only for a short time while
Jove is still sleeping. I have sent him into a sweet slumber, and
Juno has beguiled him into going to bed with her." 

Sleep now departed and went his ways to and fro among mankind, leaving
Neptune more eager than ever to help the Danaans. He darted forward
among the first ranks and shouted saying, "Argives, shall we let Hector
son of Priam have the triumph of taking our ships and covering himself
with glory? This is what he says that he shall now do, seeing that
Achilles is still in dudgeon at his ship; We shall get on very well
without him if we keep each other in heart and stand by one another.
Now, therefore, let us all do as I say. Let us each take the best
and largest shield we can lay hold of, put on our helmets, and sally
forth with our longest spears in our hands; will lead you on, and
Hector son of Priam, rage as he may, will not dare to hold out against
us. If any good staunch soldier has only a small shield, let him hand
it over to a worse man, and take a larger one for himself."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The son of Tydeus,
Ulysses, and Agamemnon, wounded though they were, set the others in
array, and went about everywhere effecting the exchanges of armour;
the most valiant took the best armour, and gave the worse to the worse
man. When they had donned their bronze armour they marched on with
Neptune at their head. In his strong hand he grasped his terrible
sword, keen of edge and flashing like lightning; woe to him who comes
across it in the day of battle; all men quake for fear and keep away
from it. 

Hector on the other side set the Trojans in array. Thereon Neptune
and Hector waged fierce war on one another- Hector on the Trojan and
Neptune on the Argive side. Mighty was the uproar as the two forces
met; the sea came rolling in towards the ships and tents of the Achaeans,
but waves do not thunder on the shore more loudly when driven before
the blast of Boreas, nor do the flames of a forest fire roar more
fiercely when it is well alight upon the mountains, nor does the wind
bellow with ruder music as it tears on through the tops of when it
is blowing its hardest, than the terrible shout which the Trojans
and Achaeans raised as they sprang upon one another. 

Hector first aimed his spear at Ajax, who was turned full towards
him, nor did he miss his aim. The spear struck him where two bands
passed over his chest- the band of his shield and that of his silver-studded
sword- and these protected his body. Hector was angry that his spear
should have been hurled in vain, and withdrew under cover of his men.
As he was thus retreating, Ajax son of Telamon struck him with a stone,
of which there were many lying about under the men's feet as they
fought- brought there to give support to the ships' sides as they
lay on the shore. Ajax caught up one of them and struck Hector above
the rim of his shield close to his neck; the blow made him spin round
like a top and reel in all directions. As an oak falls headlong when
uprooted by the lightning flash of father Jove, and there is a terrible
smell of brimstone- no man can help being dismayed if he is standing
near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing- even so did Hector
fall to earth and bite the dust. His spear fell from his hand, but
his shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze
armour rang about him. 

The sons of the Achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him,
hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the Trojans,
but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered
by the princes Polydamas, Aeneas, Agenor, Sarpedon captain of the
Lycians, and noble Glaucus: of the others, too, there was not one
who was unmindful of him, and they held their round shields over him
to cover him. His comrades then lifted him off the ground and bore
him away from the battle to the place where his horses stood waiting
for him at the rear of the fight with their driver and the chariot;
these then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. When
they reached the ford of the air stream of Xanthus, begotten of Immortal
Jove, they took him from off his chariot and laid him down on the
ground; they poured water over him, and as they did so he breathed
again and opened his eyes. Then kneeling on his knees he vomited blood,
but soon fell back on to the ground, and his eyes were again closed
in darkness for he was still sturined by the blow. 

When the Argives saw Hector leaving the field, they took heart and
set upon the Trojans yet more furiously. Ajax fleet son of Oileus
began by springing on Satnius son of Enops and wounding him with his
spear: a fair naiad nymph had borne him to Enops as he was herding
cattle by the banks of the river Satnioeis. The son of Oileus came
up to him and struck him in the flank so that he fell, and a fierce
fight between Trojans and Danaans raged round his body. Polydamas
son of Panthous drew near to avenge him, and wounded Prothoenor son
of Areilycus on the right shoulder; the terrible spear went right
through his shoulder, and he clutched the earth as he fell in the
dust. Polydamas vaunted loudly over him saying, "Again I take it that
the spear has not sped in vain from the strong hand of the son of
Panthous; an Argive has caught it in his body, and it will serve him
for a staff as he goes down into the house of Hades." 

The Argives were maddened by this boasting. Ajax son of Telamon was
more angry than any, for the man had fallen close be, him; so he aimed
at Polydamas as he was retreating, but Polydamas saved himself by
swerving aside and the spear struck Archelochus son of Antenor, for
heaven counselled his destruction; it struck him where the head springs
from the neck at the top joint of the spine, and severed both the
tendons at the back of the head. His head, mouth, and nostrils reached
the ground long before his legs and knees could do so, and Ajax shouted
to Polydamas saying, "Think, Polydamas, and tell me truly whether
this man is not as well worth killing as Prothoenor was: he seems
rich, and of rich family, a brother, it may be, or son of the knight
Antenor, for he is very like him." 

But he knew well who it was, and the Trojans were greatly angered.
Acamas then bestrode his brother's body and wounded Promachus the
Boeotian with his spear, for he was trying to drag his brother's body
away. Acamas vaunted loudly over him saying, "Argive archers, braggarts
that you are, toil and suffering shall not be for us only, but some
of you too shall fall here as well as ourselves. See how Promachus
now sleeps, vanquished by my spear; payment for my brother's blood
has not long delayed; a man, therefore, may well be thankful if he
leaves a kinsman in his house behind him to avenge his fall."

His taunts infuriated the Argives, and Peneleos was more enraged than
any of them. He sprang towards Acamas, but Acamas did not stand his
ground, and he killed Ilioneus son of the rich flock-master Phorbas,
whom Mercury had favoured and endowed with greater wealth than any
other of the Trojans. Ilioneus was his only son, and Peneleos now
wounded him in the eye under his eyebrows, tearing the eye-ball from
its socket: the spear went right through the eye into the nape of
the neck, and he fell, stretching out both hands before him. Peneleos
then drew his sword and smote him on the neck, so that both head and
helmet came tumbling down to the ground with the spear still sticking
in the eye; he then held up the head, as though it had been a poppy-head,
and showed it to the Trojans, vaunting over them as he did so. "Trojans,"
he cried, "bid the father and mother of noble Ilioneus make moan for
him in their house, for the wife also of Promachus son of Alegenor
will never be gladdened by the coming of her dear husband- when we
Argives return with our ships from Troy." 

As he spoke fear fell upon them, and every man looked round about
to see whither he might fly for safety. 

Tell me now, O Muses that dwell on Olympus, who was the first of the
Argives to bear away blood-stained spoils after Neptune lord of the
earthquake had turned the fortune of war. Ajax son of Telamon was
first to wound Hyrtius son of Gyrtius, captain of the staunch Mysians.
Antilochus killed Phalces and Mermerus, while Meriones slew Morys
and Hippotion, Teucer also killed Prothoon and Periphetes. The son
of Atreus then wounded Hyperenor shepherd of his people, in the flank,
and the bronze point made his entrails gush out as it tore in among
them; on this his life came hurrying out of him at the place where
he had been wounded, and his eyes were closed in darkness. Ajax son
of Oileus killed more than any other, for there was no man so fleet
as he to pursue flying foes when Jove had spread panic among them.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XV

But when their flight had taken them past the trench and the set
stakes, and many had fallen by the hands of the Danaans, the Trojans
made a halt on reaching their chariots, routed and pale with fear.
Jove now woke on the crests of Ida, where he was lying with golden-throned
Juno by his side, and starting to his feet he saw the Trojans and
Achaeans, the one thrown into confusion, and the others driving them
pell-mell before them with King Neptune in their midst. He saw Hector
lying on the ground with his comrades gathered round him, gasping
for breath, wandering in mind and vomiting blood, for it was not the
feeblest of the Achaeans who struck him. 

The sire of gods and men had pity on him, and looked fiercely on Juno.
"I see, Juno," said he, "you mischief- making trickster, that your
cunning has stayed Hector from fighting and has caused the rout of
his host. I am in half a mind to thrash you, in which case you will
be the first to reap the fruits of your scurvy knavery. Do you not
remember how once upon a time I had you hanged? I fastened two anvils
on to your feet, and bound your hands in a chain of gold which none
might break, and you hung in mid-air among the clouds. All the gods
in Olympus were in a fury, but they could not reach you to set you
free; when I caught any one of them I gripped him and hurled him from
the heavenly threshold till he came fainting down to earth; yet even
this did not relieve my mind from the incessant anxiety which I felt
about noble Hercules whom you and Boreas had spitefully conveyed beyond
the seas to Cos, after suborning the tempests; but I rescued him,
and notwithstanding all his mighty labours I brought him back again
to Argos. I would remind you of this that you may learn to leave off
being so deceitful, and discover how much you are likely to gain by
the embraces out of which you have come here to trick me."

Juno trembled as he spoke, and said, "May heaven above and earth below
be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx- and this is the
most solemn oath that a blessed god can take- nay, I swear also by
your own almighty head and by our bridal bed- things over which I
could never possibly perjure myself- that Neptune is not punishing
Hector and the Trojans and helping the Achaeans through any doing
of mine; it is all of his own mere motion because he was sorry to
see the Achaeans hard pressed at their ships: if I were advising him,
I should tell him to do as you bid him." 

The sire of gods and men smiled and answered, "If you, Juno, were
always to support me when we sit in council of the gods, Neptune,
like it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of thinking.
If, then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among
the rank and file of the gods, and tell Iris and Apollo lord of the
bow, that I want them- Iris, that she may go to the Achaean host and
tell Neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and Apollo, that he
may send Hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he
will thus forget his present sufferings, and drive the Achaeans back
in confusion till they fall among the ships of Achilles son of Peleus.
Achilles will then send his comrade Patroclus into battle, and Hector
will kill him in front of Ilius after he has slain many warriors,
and among them my own noble son Sarpedon. Achilles will kill Hector
to avenge Patroclus, and from that time I will bring it about that
the Achaeans shall persistently drive the Trojans back till they fulfil
the counsels of Minerva and take Ilius. But I will not stay my anger,
nor permit any god to help the Danaans till I have accomplished the
desire of the son of Peleus, according to the promise I made by bowing
my head on the day when Thetis touched my knees and besought me to
give him honour." 

Juno heeded his words and went from the heights of Ida to great Olympus.
Swift as the thought of one whose fancy carries him over vast continents,
and he says to himself, "Now I will be here, or there," and he would
have all manner of things- even so swiftly did Juno wing her way till
she came to high Olympus and went in among the gods who were gathered
in the house of Jove. When they saw her they all of them came up to
her, and held out their cups to her by way of greeting. She let the
others be, but took the cup offered her by lovely Themis, who was
first to come running up to her. "Juno," said she, "why are you here?
And you seem troubled- has your husband the son of Saturn been frightening
you?" 

And Juno answered, "Themis, do not ask me about it. You know what
a proud and cruel disposition my husband has. Lead the gods to table,
where you and all the immortals can hear the wicked designs which
he has avowed. Many a one, mortal and immortal, will be angered by
them, however peaceably he may be feasting now." 

On this Juno sat down, and the gods were troubled throughout the house
of Jove. Laughter sat on her lips but her brow was furrowed with care,
and she spoke up in a rage. "Fools that we are," she cried, "to be
thus madly angry with Jove; we keep on wanting to go up to him and
stay him by force or by persuasion, but he sits aloof and cares for
nobody, for he knows that he is much stronger than any other of the
immortals. Make the best, therefore, of whatever ills he may choose
to send each one of you; Mars, I take it, has had a taste of them
already, for his son Ascalaphus has fallen in battle- the man whom
of all others he loved most dearly and whose father he owns himself
to be." 

When he heard this Mars smote his two sturdy thighs with the flat
of his hands, and said in anger, "Do not blame me, you gods that dwell
in heaven, if I go to the ships of the Achaeans and avenge the death
of my son, even though it end in my being struck by Jove's lightning
and lying in blood and dust among the corpses." 

As he spoke he gave orders to yoke his horses Panic and Rout, while
he put on his armour. On this, Jove would have been roused to still
more fierce and implacable enmity against the other immortals, had
not Minerva, ararmed for the safety of the gods, sprung from her seat
and hurried outside. She tore the helmet from his head and the shield
from his shoulders, and she took the bronze spear from his strong
hand and set it on one side; then she said to Mars, "Madman, you are
undone; you have ears that hear not, or you have lost all judgement
and understanding; have you not heard what Juno has said on coming
straight from the presence of Olympian Jove? Do you wish to go through
all kinds of suffering before you are brought back sick and sorry
to Olympus, after having caused infinite mischief to all us others?
Jove would instantly leave the Trojans and Achaeans to themselves;
he would come to Olympus to punish us, and would grip us up one after
another, guilty or not guilty. Therefore lay aside your anger for
the death of your son; better men than he have either been killed
already or will fall hereafter, and one cannot protect every one's
whole family." 

With these words she took Mars back to his seat. Meanwhile Juno called
Apollo outside, with Iris the messenger of the gods. "Jove," she said
to them, "desires you to go to him at once on Mt. Ida; when you have
seen him you are to do as he may then bid you." 

Thereon Juno left them and resumed her seat inside, while Iris and
Apollo made all haste on their way. When they reached many-fountained
Ida, mother of wild beasts, they found Jove seated on topmost Gargarus
with a fragrant cloud encircling his head as with a diadem. They stood
before his presence, and he was pleased with them for having been
so quick in obeying the orders his wife had given them. 

He spoke to Iris first. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, tell King Neptune
what I now bid you- and tell him true. Bid him leave off fighting,
and either join the company of the gods, or go down into the sea.
If he takes no heed and disobeys me, let him consider well whether
he is strong enough to hold his own against me if I attack him. I
am older and much stronger than he is; yet he is not afraid to set
himself up as on a level with myself, of whom all the other gods stand
in awe." 

Iris, fleet as the wind, obeyed him, and as the cold hail or snowflakes
that fly from out the clouds before the blast of Boreas, even so did
she wing her way till she came close up to the great shaker of the
earth. Then she said, "I have come, O dark-haired king that holds
the world in his embrace, to bring you a message from Jove. He bids
you leave off fighting, and either join the company of the gods or
go down into the sea; if, however, you take no heed and disobey him,
he says he will come down here and fight you. He would have you keep
out of his reach, for he is older and much stronger than you are,
and yet you are not afraid to set yourself up as on a level with himself,
of whom all the other gods stand in awe." 

Neptune was very angry and said, "Great heavens! strong as Jove may
be, he has said more than he can do if he has threatened violence
against me, who am of like honour with himself. We were three brothers
whom Rhea bore to Saturn- Jove, myself, and Hades who rules the world
below. Heaven and earth were divided into three parts, and each of
us was to have an equal share. When we cast lots, it fell to me to
have my dwelling in the sea for evermore; Hades took the darkness
of the realms under the earth, while air and sky and clouds were the
portion that fell to Jove; but earth and great Olympus are the common
property of all. Therefore I will not walk as Jove would have me.
For all his strength, let him keep to his own third share and be contented
without threatening to lay hands upon me as though I were nobody.
Let him keep his bragging talk for his own sons and daughters, who
must perforce obey him. 

Iris fleet as the wind then answered, "Am I really, Neptune, to take
this daring and unyielding message to Jove, or will you reconsider
your answer? Sensible people are open to argument, and you know that
the Erinyes always range themselves on the side of the older person."

Neptune answered, "Goddess Iris, your words have been spoken in season.
It is well when a messenger shows so much discretion. Nevertheless
it cuts me to the very heart that any one should rebuke so angrily
another who is his own peer, and of like empire with himself. Now,
however, I will give way in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let
me tell you, and I mean what I say- if contrary to the desire of myself,
Minerva driver of the spoil, Juno, Mercury, and King Vulcan, Jove
spares steep Ilius, and will not let the Achaeans have the great triumph
of sacking it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable
resentment." 

Neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely did
the Achaeans miss him. Then Jove said to Apollo, "Go, dear Phoebus,
to Hector, for Neptune who holds the earth in his embrace has now
gone down under the sea to avoid the severity of my displeasure. Had
he not done so those gods who are below with Saturn would have come
to hear of the fight between us. It is better for both of us that
he should have curbed his anger and kept out of my reach, for I should
have had much trouble with him. Take, then, your tasselled aegis,
and shake it furiously, so as to set the Achaean heroes in a panic;
take, moreover, brave Hector, O Far-Darter, into your own care, and
rouse him to deeds of daring, till the Achaeans are sent flying back
to their ships and to the Hellespont. From that point I will think
it well over, how the Achaeans may have a respite from their troubles."

Apollo obeyed his father's saying, and left the crests of Ida, flying
like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. He found Hector
no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had just come
to himself again. He knew those who were about him, and the sweat
and hard breathing had left him from the moment when the will of aegis-bearing
Jove had revived him. Apollo stood beside him and said, "Hector, son
of Priam, why are you so faint, and why are you here away from the
others? Has any mishap befallen you?" 

Hector in a weak voice answered, "And which, kind sir, of the gods
are you, who now ask me thus? Do you not know that Ajax struck me
on the chest with a stone as I was killing his comrades at the ships
of the Achaeans, and compelled me to leave off fighting? I made sure
that this very day I should breathe my last and go down into the house
of Hades." 

Then King Apollo said to him, "Take heart; the son of Saturn has sent
you a mighty helper from Ida to stand by you and defend you, even
me, Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, who have been guardian hitherto
not only of yourself but of your city. Now, therefore, order your
horsemen to drive their chariots to the ships in great multitudes.
I will go before your horses to smooth the way for them, and will
turn the Achaeans in flight." 

As he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his people.
And as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and gallops gloriously
over the plain to the place where he is wont to take his bath in the
river- he tosses his head, and his mane streams over his shoulders
as in all the pride of his strength he flies full speed to the pastures
where the mares are feeding- even so Hector, when he heard what the
god said, urged his horsemen on, and sped forward as fast as his limbs
could take him. As country peasants set their hounds on to a homed
stag or wild goat- he has taken shelter under rock or thicket, and
they cannot find him, but, lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts have
roused stands in their path, and they are in no further humour for
the chase- even so the Achaeans were still charging on in a body,
using their swords and spears pointed at both ends, but when they
saw Hector going about among his men they were afraid, and their hearts
fell down into their feet. 

Then spoke Thoas son of Andraemon, leader of the Aetolians, a man
who could throw a good throw, and who was staunch also in close fight,
while few could surpass him in debate when opinions were divided.
He then with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: "What,
in heaven's name, do I now see? Is it not Hector come to life again?
Every one made sure he had been killed by Ajax son of Telamon, but
it seems that one of the gods has again rescued him. He has killed
many of us Danaans already, and I take it will yet do so, for the
hand of Jove must be with him or he would never dare show himself
so masterful in the forefront of the battle. Now, therefore, let us
all do as I say; let us order the main body of our forces to fall
back upon the ships, but let those of us who profess to be the flower
of the army stand firm, and see whether we cannot hold Hector back
at the point of our spears as soon as he comes near us; I conceive
that he will then think better of it before he tries to charge into
the press of the Danaans." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. Those who were
about Ajax and King Idomeneus, the followers moreover of Teucer, Meriones,
and Meges peer of Mars called all their best men about them and sustained
the fight against Hector and the Trojans, but the main body fell back
upon the ships of the Achaeans. 

The Trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with Hector striding
on at their head. Before him went Phoebus Apollo shrouded in cloud
about his shoulders. He bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy
fringe, which Vulcan the smith had given Jove to strike terror into
the hearts of men. With this in his hand he led on the Trojans.

The Argives held together and stood their ground. The cry of battle
rose high from either side, and the arrows flew from the bowstrings.
Many a spear sped from strong hands and fastened in the bodies of
many a valiant warrior, while others fell to earth midway, before
they could taste of man's fair flesh and glut themselves with blood.
So long as Phoebus Apollo held his aegis quietly and without shaking
it, the weapons on either side took effect and the people fell, but
when he shook it straight in the face of the Danaans and raised his
mighty battle-cry their hearts fainted within them and they forgot
their former prowess. As when two wild beasts spring in the dead of
night on a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep when the herdsman
is not there- even so were the Danaans struck helpless, for Apollo
filled them with panic and gave victory to Hector and the Trojans.

The fight then became more scattered and they killed one another where
they best could. Hector killed Stichius and Arcesilaus, the one, leader
of the Boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of Menestheus.
Aeneas killed Medon and Iasus. The first was bastard son to Oileus,
and brother to Ajax, but he lived in Phylace away from his own country,
for he had killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother Eriopis whom
Oileus had married. Iasus had become a leader of the Athenians, and
was son of Sphelus the son of Boucolos. Polydamas killed Mecisteus,
and Polites Echius, in the front of the battle, while Agenor slew
Clonius. Paris struck Deiochus from behind in the lower part of the
shoulder, as he was flying among the foremost, and the point of the
spear went clean through him. 

While they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the Achaeans
were flying pellmell to the trench and the set stakes, and were forced
back within their wall. Hector then cried out to the Trojans, "Forward
to the ships, and let the spoils be. If I see any man keeping back
on the other side the wall away from the ships I will have him killed:
his kinsmen and kinswomen shall not give him his dues of fire, but
dogs shall tear him in pieces in front of our city." 

As he spoke he laid his whip about his horses' shoulders and called
to the Trojans throughout their ranks; the Trojans shouted with a
cry that rent the air, and kept their horses neck and neck with his
own. Phoebus Apollo went before, and kicked down the banks of the
deep trench into its middle so as to make a great broad bridge, as
broad as the throw of a spear when a man is trying his strength. The
Trojan battalions poured over the bridge, and Apollo with his redoubtable
aegis led the way. He kicked down the wall of the Achaeans as easily
as a child who playing on the sea-shore has built a house of sand
and then kicks it down again and destroys it- even so did you, O Apollo,
shed toil and trouble upon the Argives, filling them with panic and
confusion. 

Thus then were the Achaeans hemmed in at their ships, calling out
to one another and raising their hands with loud cries every man to
heaven. Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, lifted
up his hands to the starry firmament of heaven, and prayed more fervently
than any of them. "Father Jove," said he, "if ever any one in wheat-growing
Argos burned you fat thigh-bones of sheep or heifer and prayed that
he might return safely home, whereon you bowed your head to him in
assent, bear it in mind now, and suffer not the Trojans to triumph
thus over the Achaeans." 

All counselling Jove thundered loudly in answer to die prayer of the
aged son of Neleus. When the heard Jove thunder they flung themselves
yet more fiercely on the Achaeans. As a wave breaking over the bulwarks
of a ship when the sea runs high before a gale- for it is the force
of the wind that makes the waves so great- even so did the Trojans
spring over the wall with a shout, and drive their chariots onwards.
The two sides fought with their double-pointed spears in hand-to-hand
encounter-the Trojans from their chariots, and the Achaeans climbing
up into their ships and wielding the long pikes that were lying on
the decks ready for use in a sea-fight, jointed and shod with bronze.

Now Patroclus, so long as the Achaeans and Trojans were fighting about
the wall, but were not yet within it and at the ships, remained sitting
in the tent of good Eurypylus, entertaining him with his conversation
and spreading herbs over his wound to ease his pain. When, however,
he saw the Trojans swarming through the breach in the wall, while
the Achaeans were clamouring and struck with panic, he cried aloud,
and smote his two thighs with the flat of his hands. "Eurypylus,"
said he in his dismay, "I know you want me badly, but I cannot stay
with you any longer, for there is hard fighting going on; a servant
shall take care of you now, for I must make all speed to Achilles,
and induce him to fight if I can; who knows but with heaven's help
I may persuade him. A man does well to listen to the advice of a friend."

When he had thus spoken he went his way. The Achaeans stood firm and
resisted the attack of the Trojans, yet though these were fewer in
number, they could not drive them back from the ships, neither could
the Trojans break the Achaean ranks and make their way in among the
tents and ships. As a carpenter's line gives a true edge to a piece
of ship's timber, in the hand of some skilled workman whom Minerva
has instructed in all kinds of useful arts- even so level was the
issue of the fight between the two sides, as they fought some round
one and some round another. 

Hector made straight for Ajax, and the two fought fiercely about the
same ship. Hector could not force Ajax back and fire the ship, nor
yet could Ajax drive Hector from the spot to which heaven had brought
him. 

Then Ajax struck Caletor son of Clytius in the chest with a spear
as he was bringing fire towards the ship. He fell heavily to the ground
and the torch dropped from his hand. When Hector saw his cousin fallen
in front of the ship he shouted to the Trojans and Lycians saying,
"Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good in close fight, bate not a
jot, but rescue the son of Clytius lest the Achaeans strip him of
his armour now that he has fallen." 

He then aimed a spear at Ajax, and missed him, but he hit Lycophron
a follower of Ajax, who came from Cythera, but was living with Ajax
inasmuch as he had killed a man among the Cythereans. Hector's spear
struck him on the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the
ship's prow on to the ground with no life left in him. Ajax shook
with rage and said to his brother, "Teucer, my good fellow, our trusty
comrade the son of Mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from
Cythera and whom we honoured as much as our own parents. Hector has
just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which
Phoebus Apollo gave you." 

Teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver
in his hands. Forthwith he showered his arrows on the Trojans, and
hit Cleitus the son of Pisenor, comrade of Polydamas the noble son
of Panthous, with the reins in his hands as he was attending to his
horses; he was in the middle of the very thickest part of the fight,
doing good service to Hector and the Trojans, but evil had now come
upon him, and not one of those who were fain to do so could avert
it, for the arrow struck him on the back of the neck. He fell from
his chariot and his horses shook the empty car as they swerved aside.
King Polydamas saw what had happened, and was the first to come up
to the horses; he gave them in charge to Astynous son of Protiaon,
and ordered him to look on, and to keep the horses near at hand. He
then went back and took his place in the front ranks. 

Teucer then aimed another arrow at Hector, and there would have been
no more fighting at the ships if he had hit him and killed him then
and there: Jove, however, who kept watch over Hector, had his eyes
on Teucer, and deprived him of his triumph, by breaking his bowstring
for him just as he was drawing it and about to take his aim; on this
the arrow went astray and the bow fell from his hands. Teucer shook
with anger and said to his brother, "Alas, see how heaven thwarts
us in all we do; it has broken my bowstring and snatched the bow from
my hand, though I strung it this selfsame morning that it might serve
me for many an arrow." 

Ajax son of Telamon answered, "My good fellow, let your bow and your
arrows be, for Jove has made them useless in order to spite the Danaans.
Take your spear, lay your shield upon your shoulder, and both fight
the Trojans yourself and urge others to do so. They may be successful
for the moment but if we fight as we ought they will find it a hard
matter to take the ships." 

Teucer then took his bow and put it by in his tent. He hung a shield
four hides thick about his shoulders, and on his comely head he set
his helmet well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and forthwith
he was by the side of Ajax. 

When Hector saw that Teucer's bow was of no more use to him, he shouted
out to the Trojans and Lycians, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians
good in close fight, be men, my friends, and show your mettle here
at the ships, for I see the weapon of one of their chieftains made
useless by the hand of Jove. It is easy to see when Jove is helping
people and means to help them still further, or again when he is bringing
them down and will do nothing for them; he is now on our side, and
is going against the Argives. Therefore swarm round the ships and
fight. If any of you is struck by spear or sword and loses his life,
let him die; he dies with honour who dies fighting for his country;
and he will leave his wife and children safe behind him, with his
house and allotment unplundered if only the Achaeans can be driven
back to their own land, they and their ships." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Ajax on the
other side exhorted his comrades saying, "Shame on you Argives, we
are now utterly undone, unless we can save ourselves by driving the
enemy from our ships. Do you think, if Hector takes them, that you
will be able to get home by land? Can you not hear him cheering on
his whole host to fire our fleet, and bidding them remember that they
are not at a dance but in battle? Our only course is to fight them
with might and main; we had better chance it, life or death, once
for all, than fight long and without issue hemmed in at our ships
by worse men than ourselves." 

With these words he put life and soul into them all. Hector then killed
Schedius son of Perimedes, leader of the Phoceans, and Ajax killed
Laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to Antenor. Polydamas killed
Otus of Cyllene a comrade of the son of Phyleus and chief of the proud
Epeans. When Meges saw this he sprang upon him, but Polydamas crouched
down, and he missed him, for Apollo would not suffer the son of Panthous
to fall in battle; but the spear hit Croesmus in the middle of his
chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and Meges stripped him
of his armour. At that moment the valiant soldier Dolops son of Lampus
sprang upon Lampus was son of Laomedon and for his valour, while his
son Dolops was versed in all the ways of war. He then struck the middle
of the son of Phyleus' shield with his spear, setting on him at close
quarters, but his good corslet made with plates of metal saved him;
Phyleus had brought it from Ephyra and the river Selleis, where his
host, King Euphetes, had given it him to wear in battle and protect
him. It now served to save the life of his son. Then Meges struck
the topmost crest of Dolops's bronze helmet with his spear and tore
away its plume of horse-hair, so that all newly dyed with scarlet
as it was it tumbled down into the dust. While he was still fighting
and confident of victory, Menelaus came up to help Meges, and got
by the side of Dolops unperceived; he then speared him in the shoulder,
from behind, and the point, driven so furiously, went through into
his chest, whereon he fell headlong. The two then made towards him
to strip him of his armour, but Hector called on all his brothers
for help, and he especially upbraided brave Melanippus son of Hiketaon,
who erewhile used to pasture his herds of cattle in Percote before
the war broke out; but when the ships of the Danaans came, he went
back to Ilius, where he was eminent among the Trojans, and lived near
Priam who treated him as one of his own sons. Hector now rebuked him
and said, "Why, Melanippus, are we thus remiss? do you take no note
of the death of your kinsman, and do you not see how they are trying
to take Dolops's armour? Follow me; there must be no fighting the
Argives from a distance now, but we must do so in close combat till
either we kill them or they take the high wall of Ilius and slay her
people." 

He led on as he spoke, and the hero Melanippus followed after. Meanwhile
Ajax son of Telamon was cheering on the Argives. "My friends," he
cried, "be men, and fear dishonour; quit yourselves in battle so as
to win respect from one another. Men who respect each other's good
opinion are less likely to be killed than those who do not, but in
flight there is neither gain nor glory." 

Thus did he exhort men who were already bent upon driving back the
Trojans. They laid his words to heart and hedged the ships as with
a wall of bronze, while Jove urged on the Trojans. Menelaus of the
loud battle-cry urged Antilochus on. "Antilochus," said he, "you are
young and there is none of the Achaeans more fleet of foot or more
valiant than you are. See if you cannot spring upon some Trojan and
kill him." 

He hurried away when he had thus spurred Antilochus, who at once darted
out from the front ranks and aimed a spear, after looking carefully
round him. The Trojans fell back as he threw, and the dart did not
speed from his hand without effect, for it struck Melanippus the proud
son of Hiketaon in the breast by the nipple as he was coming forward,
and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Antilochus sprang upon him as a dog springs on a fawn which a hunter
has hit as it was breaking away from its covert, and killed it. Even
so, O Melanippus, did stalwart Antilochus spring upon you to strip
you of your armour; but noble Hector marked him, and came running
up to him through the thick of the battle. Antilochus, brave soldier
though he was, would not stay to face him, but fled like some savage
creature which knows it has done wrong, and flies, when it has killed
a dog or a man who is herding his cattle, before a body of men can
be gathered to attack it. Even so did the son of Nestor fly, and the
Trojans and Hector with a cry that rent the air showered their weapons
after him; nor did he turn round and stay his flight till he had reached
his comrades. 

The Trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships
in fulfilment of the behests of Jove who kept spurring them on to
new deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the Argives
and defeated them by encouraging the Trojans. For he meant giving
glory to Hector son of Priam, and letting him throw fire upon the
ships, till he had fulfilled the unrighteous prayer that Thetis had
made him; Jove, therefore, bided his time till he should see the glare
of a blazing ship. From that hour he was about so to order that the
Trojans should be driven back from the ships and to vouchsafe glory
to the Achaeans. With this purpose he inspired Hector son of Priam,
who was cager enough already, to assail the ships. His fury was as
that of Mars, or as when a fire is raging in the glades of some dense
forest upon the mountains; he foamed at the mouth, his eyes glared
under his terrible eye-brows, and his helmet quivered on his temples
by reason of the fury with which he fought. Jove from heaven was with
him, and though he was but one against many, vouchsafed him victory
and glory; for he was doomed to an early death, and already Pallas
Minerva was hurrying on the hour of his destruction at the hands of
the son of Peleus. Now, however, he kept trying to break the ranks
of the enemy wherever he could see them thickest, and in the goodliest
armour; but do what he might he could not break through them, for
they stood as a tower foursquare, or as some high cliff rising from
the grey sea that braves the anger of the gale, and of the waves that
thunder up against it. He fell upon them like flames of fire from
every quarter. As when a wave, raised mountain high by wind and storm,
breaks over a ship and covers it deep in foam, the fierce winds roar
against the mast, the hearts of the sailors fail them for fear, and
they are saved but by a very little from destruction- even so were
the hearts of the Achaeans fainting within them. Or as a savage lion
attacking a herd of cows while they are feeding by thousands in the
low-lying meadows by some wide-watered shore- the herdsman is at his
wit's end how to protect his herd and keeps going about now in the
van and now in the rear of his cattle, while the lion springs into
the thick of them and fastens on a cow so that they all tremble for
fear- even so were the Achaeans utterly panic-stricken by Hector and
father Jove. Nevertheless Hector only killed Periphetes of Mycenae;
he was son of Copreus who was wont to take the orders of King Eurystheus
to mighty Hercules, but the son was a far better man than the father
in every way; he was fleet of foot, a valiant warrior, and in understanding
ranked among the foremost men of Mycenae. He it was who then afforded
Hector a triumph, for as he was turning back he stumbled against the
rim of his shield which reached his feet, and served to keep the javelins
off him. He tripped against this and fell face upward, his helmet
ringing loudly about his head as he did so. Hector saw him fall and
ran up to him; he then thrust a spear into his chest, and killed him
close to his own comrades. These, for all their sorrow, could not
help him for they were themselves terribly afraid of Hector.

They had now reached the ships and the prows of those that had been
drawn up first were on every side of them, but the Trojans came pouring
after them. The Argives were driven back from the first row of ships,
but they made a stand by their tents without being broken up and scattered;
shame and fear restrained them. They kept shouting incessantly to
one another, and Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans,
was loudest in imploring every man by his parents, and beseeching
him to stand firm. 

"Be men, my friends," he cried, "and respect one another's good opinion.
Think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your property, and
your parents whether these be alive or dead. On their behalf though
they are not here, I implore you to stand firm, and not to turn in
flight." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Minerva lifted
the thick veil of darkness from their eyes, and much light fell upon
them, alike on the side of the ships and on that where the fight was
raging. They could see Hector and all his men, both those in the rear
who were taking no part in the battle, and those who were fighting
by the ships. 

Ajax could not bring himself to retreat along with the rest, but strode
from deck to deck with a great sea-pike in his hands twelve cubits
long and jointed with rings. As a man skilled in feats of horsemanship
couples four horses together and comes tearing full speed along the
public way from the country into some large town- many both men and
women marvel as they see him for he keeps all the time changing his
horse, springing from one to another without ever missing his feet
while the horses are at a gallop- even so did Ajax go striding from
one ship's deck to another, and his voice went up into the heavens.
He kept on shouting his orders to the Danaans and exhorting them to
defend their ships and tents; neither did Hector remain within the
main body of the Trojan warriors, but as a dun eagle swoops down upon
a flock of wild-fowl feeding near a river-geese, it may be, or cranes,
or long-necked swans- even so did Hector make straight for a dark-prowed
ship, rushing right towards it; for Jove with his mighty hand impelled
him forward, and roused his people to follow him. 

And now the battle again raged furiously at the ships. You would have
thought the men were coming on fresh and unwearied, so fiercely did
they fight; and this was the mind in which they were- the Achaeans
did not believe they should escape destruction but thought themselves
doomed, while there was not a Trojan but his heart beat high with
the hope of firing the ships and putting the Achaean heroes to the
sword. 

Thus were the two sides minded. Then Hector seized the stern of the
good ship that had brought Protesilaus to Troy, but never bore him
back to his native land. Round this ship there raged a close hand-to-hand
fight between Danaans and Trojans. They did not fight at a distance
with bows and javelins, but with one mind hacked at one another in
close combat with their mighty swords and spears pointed at both ends;
they fought moreover with keen battle-axes and with hatchets. Many
a good stout blade hilted and scabbarded with iron, fell from hand
or shoulder as they fought, and the earth ran red with blood. Hector,
when he had seized the ship, would not loose his hold but held on
to its curved stern and shouted to the Trojans, "Bring fire, and raise
the battle-cry all of you with a single voice. Now has Jove vouchsafed
us a day that will pay us for all the rest; this day we shall take
the ships which came hither against heaven's will, and which have
caused us such infinite suffering through the cowardice of our councillors,
who when I would have done battle at the ships held me back and forbade
the host to follow me; if Jove did then indeed warp our judgements,
himself now commands me and cheers me on." 

As he spoke thus the Trojans sprang yet more fiercely on the Achaeans,
and Ajax no longer held his ground, for he was overcome by the darts
that were flung at him, and made sure that he was doomed. Therefore
he left the raised deck at the stern, and stepped back on to the seven-foot
bench of the oarsmen. Here he stood on the look-out, and with his
spear held back Trojan whom he saw bringing fire to the ships. All
the time he kept on shouting at the top of his voice and exhorting
the Danaans. "My friends," he cried, "Danaan heroes, servants of Mars,
be men my friends, and fight with might and with main. Can we hope
to find helpers hereafter, or a wall to shield us more surely than
the one we have? There is no strong city within reach, whence we may
draw fresh forces to turn the scales in our favour. We are on the
plain of the armed Trojans with the sea behind us, and far from our
own country. Our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our hands
and in hard fighting." 

As he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and when
any Trojan made towards the ships with fire at Hector's bidding, he
would be on the look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear.
Twelve men did he thus kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XVI

Thus did they fight about the ship of Protesilaus. Then Patroclus
drew near to Achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from some
spring whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high precipice.
When Achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said,
"Why, Patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child
that comes running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried-
she catches hold of her mother's dress to stay her though she is in
a hurry, and looks tearfully up until her mother carries her- even
such tears, Patroclus, are you now shedding. Have you anything to
say to the Myrmidons or to myself? or have you had news from Phthia
which you alone know? They tell me Menoetius son of Actor is still
alive, as also Peleus son of Aeacus, among the Myrmidons- men whose
loss we two should bitterly deplore; or are you grieving about the
Argives and the way in which they are being killed at the ships, throu
their own high-handed doings? Do not hide anything from me but tell
me that both of us may know about it." 

Then, O knight Patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "Achilles,
son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, do not be angry,
but I weep for the disaster that has now befallen the Argives. All
those who have been their champions so far are lying at the ships,
wounded by sword or spear. Brave Diomed son of Tydeus has been hit
with a spear, while famed Ulysses and Agamemnon have received sword-wounds;
Eurypylus again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled
apothecaries are attending to these heroes, and healing them of their
wounds; are you still, O Achilles, so inexorable? May it never be
my lot to nurse such a passion as you have done, to the baning of
your own good name. Who in future story will speak well of you unless
you now save the Argives from ruin? You know no pity; knight Peleus
was not your father nor Thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore
you and the sheer cliffs begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you.
If however you are kept back through knowledge of some oracle, or
if your mother Thetis has told you something from the mouth of Jove,
at least send me and the Myrmidons with me, if I may bring deliverance
to the Danaans. Let me moreover wear your armour; the Trojans may
thus mistake me for you and quit the field, so that the hard-pressed
sons of the Achaeans may have breathing time- which while they are
fighting may hardly be. We who are fresh might soon drive tired men
back from our ships and tents to their own city." 

He knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own
destruction. Achilles was deeply moved and answered, "What, noble
Patroclus, are you saying? I know no prophesyings which I am heeding,
nor has my mother told me anything from the mouth of Jove, but I am
cut to the very heart that one of my own rank should dare to rob me
because he is more powerful than I am. This, after all that I have
gone through, is more than I can endure. The girl whom the sons of
the Achaeans chose for me, whom I won as the fruit of my spear on
having sacked a city- her has King Agamemnon taken from me as though
I were some common vagrant. Still, let bygones be bygones: no man
may keep his anger for ever; I said I would not relent till battle
and the cry of war had reached my own ships; nevertheless, now gird
my armour about your shoulders, and lead the Myrmidons to battle,
for the dark cloud of Trojans has burst furiously over our fleet;
the Argives are driven back on to the beach, cooped within a narrow
space, and the whole people of Troy has taken heart to sally out against
them, because they see not the visor of my helmet gleaming near them.
Had they seen this, there would not have been a creek nor grip that
had not been filled with their dead as they fled back again. And so
it would have been, if only King Agamemnon had dealt fairly by me.
As it is the Trojans have beset our host. Diomed son of Tydeus no
longer wields his spear to defend the Danaans, neither have I heard
the voice of the son of Atreus coming from his hated head, whereas
that of murderous Hector rings in my cars as he gives orders to the
Trojans, who triumph over the Achaeans and fill the whole plain with
their cry of battle. But even so, Patroclus, fall upon them and save
the fleet, lest the Trojans fire it and prevent us from being able
to return. Do, however, as I now bid you, that you may win me great
honour from all the Danaans, and that they may restore the girl to
me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. When you have driven
the Trojans from the ships, come back again. Though Juno's thundering
husband should put triumph within your reach, do not fight the Trojans
further in my absence, or you will rob me of glory that should be
mine. And do not for lust of battle go on killing the Trojans nor
lead the Achaeans on to Ilius, lest one of the ever-living gods from
Olympus attack you- for Phoebus Apollo loves them well: return when
you have freed the ships from peril, and let others wage war upon
the plain. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that not a
single man of all the Trojans might be left alive, nor yet of the
Argives, but that we two might be alone left to tear aside the mantle
that veils the brow of Troy." 

Thus did they converse. But Ajax could no longer hold his ground for
the shower of darts that rained upon him; the will of Jove and the
javelins of the Trojans were too much for him; the helmet that gleamed
about his temples rang with the continuous clatter of the missiles
that kept pouring on to it and on to the cheek-pieces that protected
his face. Moreover his left shoulder was tired with having held his
shield so long, yet for all this, let fly at him as they would, they
could not make him give ground. He could hardly draw his breath, the
sweat rained from every pore of his body, he had not a moment's respite,
and on all sides he was beset by danger upon danger. 

And now, tell me, O Muses that hold your mansions on Olympus, how
fire was thrown upon the ships of the Achaeans. Hector came close
up and let drive with his great sword at the ashen spear of Ajax.
He cut it clean in two just behind where the point was fastened on
to the shaft of the spear. Ajax, therefore, had now nothing but a
headless spear, while the bronze point flew some way off and came
ringing down on to the ground. Ajax knew the hand of heaven in this,
and was dismayed at seeing that Jove had now left him utterly defenceless
and was willing victory for the Trojans. Therefore he drew back, and
the Trojans flung fire upon the ship which was at once wrapped in
flame. 

The fire was now flaring about the ship's stern, whereon Achilles
smote his two thighs and said to Patroclus, "Up, noble knight, for
I see the glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they destroy
our ships, and there be no way by which we may retreat. Gird on your
armour at once while I call our people together." 

As he spoke Patroclus put on his armour. First he greaved his legs
with greaves of good make, and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver;
after this he donned the cuirass of the son of Aeacus, richly inlaid
and studded. He hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his
shoulders, and then his mighty shield. On his comely head he set his
helmet, well wrought, with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it. He grasped two redoubtable spears that suited his hands,
but he did not take the spear of noble Achilles, so stout and strong,
for none other of the Achaeans could wield it, though Achilles could
do so easily. This was the ashen spear from Mount Pelion, which Chiron
had cut upon a mountain top and had given to Peleus, wherewith to
deal out death among heroes. He bade Automedon yoke his horses with
all speed, for he was the man whom he held in honour next after Achilles,
and on whose support in battle he could rely most firmly. Automedon
therefore yoked the fleet horses Xanthus and Balius, steeds that could
fly like the wind: these were they whom the harpy Podarge bore to
the west wind, as she was grazing in a meadow by the waters of the
river Oceanus. In the side traces he set the noble horse Pedasus,
whom Achilles had brought away with him when he sacked the city of
Eetion, and who, mortal steed though he was, could take his place
along with those that were immortal. 

Meanwhile Achilles went about everywhere among the tents, and bade
his Myrmidons put on their armour. Even as fierce ravening wolves
that are feasting upon a homed stag which they have killed upon the
mountains, and their jaws are red with blood- they go in a pack to
lap water from the clear spring with their long thin tongues; and
they reek of blood and slaughter; they know not what fear is, for
it is hunger drives them- even so did the leaders and counsellors
of the Myrmidons gather round the good squire of the fleet descendant
of Aeacus, and among them stood Achilles himself cheering on both
men and horses. 

Fifty ships had noble Achilles brought to Troy, and in each there
was a crew of fifty oarsmen. Over these he set five captains whom
he could trust, while he was himself commander over them all. Menesthius
of the gleaming corslet, son to the river Spercheius that streams
from heaven, was captain of the first company. Fair Polydora daughter
of Peleus bore him to ever-flowing Spercheius- a woman mated with
a god- but he was called son of Borus son of Perieres, with whom his
mother was living as his wedded wife, and who gave great wealth to
gain her. The second company was led by noble Eudorus, son to an unwedded
woman. Polymele, daughter of Phylas the graceful dancer, bore him;
the mighty slayer of Argos was enamoured of her as he saw her among
the singing women at a dance held in honour of Diana the rushing huntress
of the golden arrows; he therefore- Mercury, giver of all good- went
with her into an upper chamber, and lay with her in secret, whereon
she bore him a noble son Eudorus, singularly fleet of foot and in
fight valiant. When Ilithuia goddess of the pains of child-birth brought
him to the light of day, and he saw the face of the sun, mighty Echecles
son of Actor took the mother to wife, and gave great wealth to gain
her, but her father Phylas brought the child up, and took care of
him, doting as fondly upon him as though he were his own son. The
third company was led by Pisander son of Maemalus, the finest spearman
among all the Myrmidons next to Achilles' own comrade Patroclus. The
old knight Phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and Alcimedon,
noble son of Laerceus of the fifth. 

When Achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, "Myrmidons, remember your
threats against the Trojans while you were at the ships in the time
of my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'Cruel son of Peleus,'
you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless
are you. You keep us here at the ships against our will; if you are
so relentless it were better we went home over the sea.' Often have
you gathered and thus chided with me. The hour is now come for those
high feats of arms that you have so long been pining for, therefore
keep high hearts each one of you to do battle with the Trojans."

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they serried
their companies yet more closely when they heard the of their king.
As the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high house
which is to give shelter from the winds- even so closely were the
helmets and bossed shields set against one another. Shield pressed
on shield, helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the
horse-hair plumes on the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched
each other as they bent their heads. 

In front of them all two men put on their armour- Patroclus and Automedon-
two men, with but one mind to lead the Myrmidons. Then Achilles went
inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest which silver-footed
Thetis had given him to take on board ship, and which she had filled
with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good thick rugs. In
this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which no man but
himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to any other
god save only to father Jove. He took the cup from the chest and cleansed
it with sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and after he
had washed his hands he drew wine. Then he stood in the middle of
the court and prayed, looking towards heaven, and making his drink-offering
of wine; nor was he unseen of Jove whose joy is in thunder. "King
Jove," he cried, "lord of Dodona, god of the Pelasgi, who dwellest
afar, you who hold wintry Dodona in your sway, where your prophets
the Selli dwell around you with their feet unwashed and their couches
made upon the ground- if you heard me when I prayed to you aforetime,
and did me honour while you sent disaster on the Achaeans, vouchsafe
me now the fulfilment of yet this further prayer. I shall stay here
where my ships are lying, but I shall send my comrade into battle
at the head of many Myrmidons. Grant, O all-seeing Jove, that victory
may go with him; put your courage into his heart that Hector may learn
whether my squire is man enough to fight alone, or whether his might
is only then so indomitable when I myself enter the turmoil of war.
Afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of battle from
the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armour and
his comrades, fighters in close combat." 

Thus did he pray, and all-counselling Jove heard his prayer. Part
of it he did indeed vouchsafe him- but not the whole. He granted that
Patroclus should thrust back war and battle from the ships, but refused
to let him come safely out of the fight. 

When he had made his drink-offering and had thus prayed, Achilles
went inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest.

Then he again came out, for he still loved to look upon the fierce
fight that raged between the Trojans and Achaeans. 

Meanwhile the armed band that was about Patroclus marched on till
they sprang high in hope upon the Trojans. They came swarming out
like wasps whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly children
love to tease, whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung-
or again, if a wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident,
every wasp will come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones-
even with such rage and courage did the Myrmidons swarm from their
ships, and their cry of battle rose heavenwards. Patroclus called
out to his men at the top of his voice, "Myrmidons, followers of Achilles
son of Peleus, be men my friends, fight with might and with main,
that we may win glory for the son of Peleus, who is far the foremost
man at the ships of the Argives- he, and his close fighting followers.
The son of Atreus King Agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing
no respect to the bravest of the Achaeans." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell
in a body upon the Trojans. The ships rang again with the cry which
the Achaeans raised, and when the Trojans saw the brave son of Menoetius
and his squire all gleaming in their armour, they were daunted and
their battalions were thrown into confusion, for they thought the
fleet son of Peleus must now have put aside his anger, and have been
reconciled to Agamemnon; every one, therefore, looked round about
to see whither he might fly for safety. 

Patroclus first aimed a spear into the middle of the press where men
were packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of Protesilaus.
He hit Pyraechmes who had led his Paeonian horsemen from the Amydon
and the broad waters of the river Axius; the spear struck him on the
right shoulder, and with a groan he fell backwards in the dust; on
this his men were thrown into confusion, for by killing their leader,
who was the finest soldier among them, Patroclus struck panic into
them all. He thus drove them from the ship and quenched the fire that
was then blazing- leaving the half-burnt ship to lie where it was.
The Trojans were now driven back with a shout that rent the skies,
while the Danaans poured after them from their ships, shouting also
without ceasing. As when Jove, gatherer of the thunder-cloud, spreads
a dense canopy on the top of some lofty mountain, and all the peaks,
the jutting headlands, and forest glades show out in the great light
that flashes from the bursting heavens, even so when the Danaans had
now driven back the fire from their ships, they took breath for a
little while; but the fury of the fight was not yet over, for the
Trojans were not driven back in utter rout, but still gave battle,
and were ousted from their ground only by sheer fighting.

The fight then became more scattered, and the chieftains killed one
another when and how they could. The valiant son of Menoetius first
drove his spear into the thigh of Areilycus just as he was turning
round; the point went clean through, and broke the bone so that he
fell forward. Meanwhile Menelaus struck Thoas in the chest, where
it was exposed near the rim of his shield, and he fell dead. The son
of Phyleus saw Amphiclus about to attack him, and ere he could do
so took aim at the upper part of his thigh, where the muscles are
thicker than in any other part; the spear tore through all the sinews
of the leg, and his eyes were closed in darkness. Of the sons of Nestor
one, Antilochus, speared Atymnius, driving the point of the spear
through his throat, and down he fell. Maris then sprang on Antilochus
in hand-to-hand fight to avenge his brother, and bestrode the body
spear in hand; but valiant Thrasymedes was too quick for him, and
in a moment had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his blow;
his aim was true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root
of his arm, and tore them right down to the bone, so he fell heavily
to the ground and his eyes were closed in darkness. Thus did these
two noble comrades of Sarpedon go down to Erebus slain by the two
sons of Nestor; they were the warrior sons of Amisodorus, who had
reared the invincible Chimaera, to the bane of many. Ajax son of Oileus
sprang on Cleobulus and took him alive as he was entangled in the
crush; but he killed him then and there by a sword-blow on the neck.
The sword reeked with his blood, while dark death and the strong hand
of fate gripped him and closed his eyes. 

Peneleos and Lycon now met in close fight, for they had missed each
other with their spears. They had both thrown without effect, so now
they drew their swords. Lycon struck the plumed crest of Peneleos'
helmet but his sword broke at the hilt, while Peneleos smote Lycon
on the neck under the ear. The blade sank so deep that the head was
held on by nothing but the skin, and there was no more life left in
him. Meriones gave chase to Acamas on foot and caught him up just
as he was about to mount his chariot; he drove a spear through his
right shoulder so that he fell headlong from the car, and his eyes
were closed in darkness. Idomeneus speared Erymas in the mouth; the
bronze point of the spear went clean through it beneath the brain,
crashing in among the white bones and smashing them up. His teeth
were all of them knocked out and the blood came gushing in a stream
from both his eyes; it also came gurgling up from his mouth and nostrils,
and the darkness of death enfolded him round about. 

Thus did these chieftains of the Danaans each of them kill his man.
As ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them when
they are alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the main flock
through the carelessness of the shepherd- and when the wolves see
this they pounce upon them at once because they cannot defend themselves-
even so did the Danaans now fall on the Trojans, who fled with ill-omened
cries in their panic and had no more fight left in them.

Meanwhile great Ajax kept on trying to drive a spear into Hector,
but Hector was so skilful that he held his broad shoulders well under
cover of his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the whizzing
of the arrows and the heavy thud of the spears. He well knew that
the fortunes of the day had changed, but still stood his ground and
tried to protect his comrades. 

As when a cloud goes up into heaven from Olympus, rising out of a
clear sky when Jove is brewing a gale- even with such panic stricken
rout did the Trojans now fly, and there was no order in their going.
Hector's fleet horses bore him and his armour out of the fight, and
he left the Trojan host penned in by the deep trench against their
will. Many a yoke of horses snapped the pole of their chariots in
the trench and left their master's car behind them. Patroclus gave
chase, calling impetuously on the Danaans and full of fury against
the Trojans, who, being now no longer in a body, filled all the ways
with their cries of panic and rout; the air was darkened with the
clouds of dust they raised, and the horses strained every nerve in
their flight from the tents and ships towards the city. 

Patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men flying
in confusion, cheering on his men the while. Chariots were being smashed
in all directions, and many a man came tumbling down from his own
car to fall beneath the wheels of that of Patroclus, whose immortal
steeds, given by the gods to Peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound
as they sped onward. He was intent on trying to get near Hector, for
he had set his heart on spearing him, but Hector's horses were now
hurrying him away. As the whole dark earth bows before some tempest
on an autumn day when Jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving
crooked judgement in their courts, and arriving justice therefrom
without heed to the decrees of heaven- all the rivers run full and
the torrents tear many a new channel as they roar headlong from the
mountains to the dark sea, and it fares ill with the works of men-
even such was the stress and strain of the Trojan horses in their
flight. 

Patroclus now cut off the battalions that were nearest to him and
drove them back to the ships. They were doing their best to reach
the city, but he would not Yet them, and bore down on them between
the river and the ships and wall. Many a fallen comrade did he then
avenge. First he hit Pronous with a spear on the chest where it was
exposed near the rim of his shield, and he fell heavily to the ground.
Next he sprang on Thestor son of Enops, who was sitting all huddled
up in his chariot, for he had lost his head and the reins had been
torn out of his hands. Patroclus went up to him and drove a spear
into his right jaw; he thus hooked him by the teeth and the spear
pulled him over the rim of his car, as one who sits at the end of
some jutting rock and draws a strong fish out of the sea with a hook
and a line- even so with his spear did he pull Thestor all gaping
from his chariot; he then threw him down on his face and he died while
falling. On this, as Erylaus was on to attack him, he struck him full
on the head with a stone, and his brains were all battered inside
his helmet, whereon he fell headlong to the ground and the pangs of
death took hold upon him. Then he laid low, one after the other, Erymas,
Amphoterus, Epaltes, Tlepolemus, Echius son of Damastor, Pyris, lpheus,
Euippus and Polymelus son of Argeas. 

Now when Sarpedon saw his comrades, men who wore ungirdled tunics,
being overcome by Patroclus son of Menoetius, he rebuked the Lycians
saying. "Shame on you, where are you flying to? Show your mettle;
I will myself meet this man in fight and learn who it is that is so
masterful; he has done us much hurt, and has stretched many a brave
man upon the ground." 

He sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and Patroclus, when he saw
this, leaped on to the ground also. The two then rushed at one another
with loud cries like eagle-beaked crook-taloned vultures that scream
and tear at one another in some high mountain fastness. 

The son of scheming Saturn looked down upon them in pity and said
to Juno who was his wife and sister, "Alas, that it should be the
lot of Sarpedon whom I love so dearly to perish by the hand of Patroclus.
I am in two minds whether to catch him up out of the fight and set
him down safe and sound in the fertile land of Lycia, or to let him
now fall by the hand of the son of Menoetius." 

And Juno answered, "Most dread son of Saturn, what is this that you
are saying? Would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has long been
fated, out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we shall not
all of us be of your mind. I say further, and lay my saying to your
heart, that if you send Sarpedon safely to his own home, some other
of the gods will be also wanting to escort his son out of battle,
for there are many sons of gods fighting round the city of Troy, and
you will make every one jealous. If, however, you are fond of him
and pity him, let him indeed fall by the hand of Patroclus, but as
soon as the life is gone out of him, send Death and sweet Sleep to
bear him off the field and take him to the broad lands of Lycia, where
his brothers and his kinsmen will bury him with mound and pillar,
in due honour to the dead." 

The sire of gods and men assented, but he shed a rain of blood upon
the earth in honour of his son whom Patroclus was about to kill on
the rich plain of Troy far from his home. 

When they were now come close to one another Patroclus struck Thrasydemus,
the brave squire of Sarpedon, in the lower part of the belly, and
killed him. Sarpedon then aimed a spear at Patroclus and missed him,
but he struck the horse Pedasus in the right shoulder, and it screamed
aloud as it lay, groaning in the dust until the life went out of it.
The other two horses began to plunge; the pole of the chariot cracked
and they got entangled in the reins through the fall of the horse
that was yoked along with them; but Automedon knew what to do; without
the loss of a moment he drew the keen blade that hung by his sturdy
thigh and cut the third horse adrift; whereon the other two righted
themselves, and pulling hard at the reins again went together into
battle. 

Sarpedon now took a second aim at Patroclus, and again missed him,
the point of the spear passed over his left shoulder without hitting
him. Patroclus then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped not from
his hand in vain, for he hit Sarpedon just where the midriff surrounds
the ever-beating heart. He fell like some oak or silver poplar or
tall pine to which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains
to make timber for ship-building- even so did he lie stretched at
full length in front of his chariot and horses, moaning and clutching
at the blood-stained dust. As when a lion springs with a bound upon
a herd of cattle and fastens on a great black bull which dies bellowing
in its clutches- even so did the leader of the Lycian warriors struggle
in death as he fell by the hand of Patroclus. He called on his trusty
comrade and said, "Glaucus, my brother, hero among heroes, put forth
all your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit yourself
like a valiant soldier. First go about among the Lycian captains and
bid them fight for Sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save
my armour from being taken. My name will haunt you henceforth and
for ever if the Achaeans rob me of my armour now that I have fallen
at their ships. Do your very utmost and call all my people together."

Death closed his eyes as he spoke. Patroclus planted his heel on his
breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out
along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and Sarpedon's soul
at the same time. Hard by the Myrmidons held his snorting steeds,
who were wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.

Glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what Sarpedon said,
for he could not help him. He had to support his arm with his other
hand, being in great pain through the wound which Teucer's arrow had
given him when Teucer was defending the wall as he, Glaucus, was assailing
it. Therefore he prayed to far-darting Apollo saying, "Hear me O king
from your seat, may be in the rich land of Lycia, or may be in Troy,
for in all places you can hear the prayer of one who is in distress,
as I now am. I have a grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain,
there is no staunching the blood, and my whole arm drags by reason
of my hurt, so that I cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and
fight them, thou our prince, Jove's son Sarpedon, is slain. Jove defended
not his son, do you, therefore, O king, heal me of my wound, ease
my pain and grant me strength both to cheer on the Lycians and to
fight along with them round the body of him who has fallen."

Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
Glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had answered
his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the Lycian captains,
and bade them come to fight about the body of Sarpedon. From these
he strode on among the Trojans to Polydamas son of Panthous and Agenor;
he then went in search of Aeneas and Hector, and when he had found
them he said, "Hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies, who
languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do
nothing to support them. Sarpedon leader of the Lycian warriors has
fallen- he who was at once the right and might of Lycia; Mars has
laid him low by the spear of Patroclus. Stand by him, my friends,
and suffer not the Myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat
his body with contumely in revenge for all the Danaans whom we have
speared at the ships." 

As he spoke the Trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief;
for Sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays
of their city, both as having much people with him, and himself the
foremost among them all. Led by Hector, who was infuriated by the
fall of Sarpedon, they made instantly for the Danaans with all their
might, while the undaunted spirit of Patroclus son of Menoetius cheered
on the Achaeans. First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, men who needed
no bidding. "Ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show youselves
the men you have always been, or even better- Sarpedon is fallen-
he who was first to overleap the wall of the Achaeans; let us take
the body and outrage it; let us strip the armour from his shoulders,
and kill his comrades if they try to rescue his body." 

He spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides, therefore,
the Trojans and Lycians on the one hand, and the Myrmidons and Achaeans
on the other, strengthened their battalions, and fought desperately
about the body of Sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while. Mighty was
the din of their armour as they came together, and Jove shed a thick
darkness over the fight, to increase the of the battle over the body
of his son. 

At first the Trojans made some headway against the Achaeans, for one
of the best men among the Myrmidons was killed, Epeigeus, son of noble
Agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of Budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge
with Peleus and Thetis, who sent him to Ilius the land of noble steeds
to fight the Trojans under Achilles. Hector now struck him on the
head with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his
brains inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face
foremost upon the body of Sarpedon, and there died. Patroclus was
enraged by the death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks
as swiftly as a hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings.
Even so swiftly, O noble knight Patroclus, did you make straight for
the Lycians and Trojans to avenge your comrade. Forthwith he struck
Sthenelaus the son of Ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke
the tendons that join it to the head and spine. On this Hector and
the front rank of his men gave ground. As far as a man can throw a
javelin when competing for some prize, or even in battle- so far did
the Trojans now retreat before the Achaeans. Glaucus, captain of the
Lycians, was the first to rally them, by killing Bathycles son of
Chalcon who lived in Hellas and was the richest man among the Myrmidons.
Glaucus turned round suddenly, just as Bathycles who was pursuing
him was about to lay hold of him, and drove his spear right into the
middle of his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and the
fall of so good a man filled the Achaeans with dismay, while the Trojans
were exultant, and came up in a body round the corpse. Nevertheless
the Achaeans, mindful of their prowess, bore straight down upon them.

Meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the Trojans, Laogonus son
of Onetor, who was priest of Jove of Mt. Ida, and was honoured by
the people as though he were a god. Meriones struck him under the
jaw and ear, so that life went out of him and the darkness of death
laid hold upon him. Aeneas then aimed a spear at Meriones, hoping
to hit him under the shield as he was advancing, but Meriones saw
it coming and stooped forward to avoid it, whereon the spear flew
past him and the point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went
on quivering till Mars robbed it of its force. The spear, therefore,
sped from Aeneas's hand in vain and fell quivering to the ground.
Aeneas was angry and said, "Meriones, you are a good dancer, but if
I had hit you my spear would soon have made an end of you."

And Meriones answered, "Aeneas, for all your bravery, you will not
be able to make an end of every one who comes against you. You are
only a mortal like myself, and if I were to hit you in the middle
of your shield with my spear, however strong and self-confident you
may be, I should soon vanquish you, and you would yield your life
to Hades of the noble steeds." 

On this the son of Menoetius rebuked him and said, "Meriones, hero
though you be, you should not speak thus; taunting speeches, my good
friend, will not make the Trojans draw away from the dead body; some
of them must go under ground first; blows for battle, and words for
council; fight, therefore, and say nothing." 

He led the way as he spoke and the hero went forward with him. As
the sound of woodcutters in some forest glade upon the mountains-
and the thud of their axes is heard afar- even such a din now rose
from earth-clash of bronze armour and of good ox-hide shields, as
men smote each other with their swords and spears pointed at both
ends. A man had need of good eyesight now to know Sarpedon, so covered
was he from head to foot with spears and blood and dust. Men swarmed
about the body, as flies that buzz round the full milk-pails in spring
when they are brimming with milk- even so did they gather round Sarpedon;
nor did Jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight,
but kept looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best
to kill Patroclus, and considering whether Hector should be allowed
to end him now in the fight round the body of Sarpedon, and strip
him of his armour, or whether he should let him give yet further trouble
to the Trojans. In the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire
of Achilles son of Peleus should drive Hector and the Trojans back
towards the city and take the lives of many. First, therefore, he
made Hector turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and
fled, bidding the other Trojans fly also, for he saw that the scales
of Jove had turned against him. Neither would the brave Lycians stand
firm; they were dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to
the heart amid a heap of corpses- for when the son of Saturn made
the fight wax hot many had fallen above him. The Achaeans, therefore
stripped the gleaming armour from his shoulders and the brave son
of Menoetius gave it to his men to take to the ships. Then Jove lord
of the storm-cloud said to Apollo, "Dear Phoebus, go, I pray you,
and take Sarpedon out of range of the weapons; cleanse the black blood
from off him, and then bear him a long way off where you may wash
him in the river, anoint him with ambrosia, and clothe him in immortal
raiment; this done, commit him to the arms of the two fleet messengers,
Death, and Sleep, who will carry him straightway to the rich land
of Lycia, where his brothers and kinsmen will inter him, and will
raise both mound and pillar to his memory, in due honour to the dead."

Thus he spoke. Apollo obeyed his father's saying, and came down from
the heights of Ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he took
Sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way
off, where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia
and clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to
the arms of the two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who presently
set him down in the rich land of Lycia. 

Meanwhile Patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to Automedon,
pursued the Trojans and Lycians in the pride and foolishness of his
heart. Had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of Peleus, he would
have, escaped death and have been scatheless; but the counsels of
Jove pass man's understanding; he will put even a brave man to flight
and snatch victory from his grasp, or again he will set him on to
fight, as he now did when he put a high spirit into the heart of Patroclus.

Who then first, and who last, was slain by you, O Patroclus, when
the gods had now called you to meet your doom? First Adrestus, Autonous,
Echeclus, Perimus the son of Megas, Epistor and Melanippus; after
these he killed Elasus, Mulius, and Pylartes. These he slew, but the
rest saved themselves by flight. 

The sons of the Achaeans would now have taken Troy by the hands of
Patroclus, for his spear flew in all directions, had not Phoebus Apollo
taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the
Trojans. Thrice did Patroclus charge at an angle of the high wall,
and thrice did Apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his
own immortal hands. When Patroclus was coming on like a god for yet
a fourth time, Apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said,
"Draw back, noble Patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of
the Trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of Achilles who is
a far better man than you are." On hearing this, Patroclus withdrew
to some distance and avoided the anger of Apollo. 

Meanwhile Hector was waiting with his horses inside the Scaean gates,
in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call
the army inside the gates. As he was thus doubting Phoebus Apollo
drew near him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior Asius,
who was Hector's uncle, being own brother to Hecuba, and son of Dymas
who lived in Phrygia by the waters of the river Sangarius; in his
likeness Jove's son Apollo now spoke to Hector saying, "Hector, why
have you left off fighting? It is ill done of you. If I were as much
better a man than you, as I am worse, you should soon rue your slackness.
Drive straight towards Patroclus, if so be that Apollo may grant you
a triumph over him, and you may rull him." 

With this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and Hector bade
Cebriones drive again into the fight. Apollo passed in among them,
and struck panic into the Argives, while he gave triumph to Hector
and the Trojans. Hector let the other Danaans alone and killed no
man, but drove straight at Patroclus. Patroclus then sprang from his
chariot to the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right
a jagged stone as large as his hand could hold. He stood still and
threw it, nor did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was
not in vain, for the stone struck Cebriones, Hector's charioteer,
a bastard son of Priam, as he held the reins in his hands. The stone
hit him on the forehead and drove his brows into his head for the
bone was smashed, and his eyes fell to the ground at his feet. He
dropped dead from his chariot as though he were diving, and there
was no more life left in him. Over him did you then vaunt, O knight
Patroclus, saying, "Bless my heart, how active he is, and how well
he dives. If we had been at sea this fellow would have dived from
the ship's side and brought up as many oysters as the whole crew could
stomach, even in rough water, for he has dived beautifully off his
chariot on to the ground. It seems, then, that there are divers also
among the Trojans." 

As he spoke he flung himself on Cebriones with the spring, as it were,
of a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself struck in the
chest, and his courage is his own bane- even so furiously, O Patroclus,
did you then spring upon Cebriones. Hector sprang also from his chariot
to the ground. The pair then fought over the body of Cebriones. As
two lions fight fiercely on some high mountain over the body of a
stag that they have killed, even so did these two mighty warriors,
Patroclus son of Menoetius and brave Hector, hack and hew at one another
over the corpse of Cebriones. Hector would not let him go when he
had once got him by the head, while Patroclus kept fast hold of his
feet, and a fierce fight raged between the other Danaans and Trojans.
As the east and south wind buffet one another when they beat upon
some dense forest on the mountains- there is beech and ash and spreading
cornel; the to of the trees roar as they beat on one another, and
one can hear the boughs cracking and breaking- even so did the Trojans
and Achaeans spring upon one another and lay about each other, and
neither side would give way. Many a pointed spear fell to ground and
many a winged arrow sped from its bow-string about the body of Cebriones;
many a great stone, moreover, beat on many a shield as they fought
around his body, but there he lay in the whirling clouds of dust,
all huge and hugely, heedless of his driving now. 

So long as the sun was still high in mid-heaven the weapons of either
side were alike deadly, and the people fell; but when he went down
towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Achaeans proved to
be beyond all forecast stronger, so that they drew Cebriones out of
range of the darts and tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the armour
from his shoulders. Then Patroclus sprang like Mars with fierce intent
and a terrific shout upon the Trojans, and thrice did he kill nine
men; but as he was coming on like a god for a time, then, O Patroclus,
was the hour of your end approaching, for Phoebus fought you in fell
earnest. Patroclus did not see him as he moved about in the crush,
for he was enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god struck him from
behind on his back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand,
so that his eyes turned dizzy. Phoebus Apollo beat the helmet from
off his head, and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where
its horse-hair plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. Never
indeed had that helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect
the head and comely forehead of the godlike hero Achilles. Now, however,
Zeus delivered it over to be worn by Hector. Nevertheless the end
of Hector also was near. The bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong,
was broken in the hand of Patroclus, while his shield that covered
him from head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that
held it, and Apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.

On this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood
as one dazed; whereon Euphorbus son of Panthous a Dardanian, the best
spearman of his time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner,
came behind him and struck him in the back with a spear, midway between
the shoulders. This man as soon as ever he had come up with his chariot
had dismounted twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of
war- he it was, O knight Patroclus, that first drove a weapon into
you, but he did not quite overpower you. Euphorbus then ran back into
the crowd, after drawing his ashen spear out of the wound; he would
not stand firm and wait for Patroclus, unarmed though he now was,
to attack him; but Patroclus unnerved, alike by the blow the god had
given him and by the spear-wound, drew back under cover of his men
in fear for his life. Hector on this, seeing him to be wounded and
giving ground, forced his way through the ranks, and when close up
with him struck him in the lower part of the belly with a spear, driving
the bronze point right through it, so that he fell heavily to the
ground to the great of the Achaeans. As when a lion has fought some
fierce wild-boar and worsted him- the two fight furiously upon the
mountains over some little fountain at which they would both drink,
and the lion has beaten the boar till he can hardly breathe- even
so did Hector son of Priam take the life of the brave son of Menoetius
who had killed so many, striking him from close at hand, and vaunting
over him the while. "Patroclus," said he, "you deemed that you should
sack our city, rob our Trojan women of their freedom, and carry them
off in your ships to your own country. Fool; Hector and his fleet
horses were ever straining their utmost to defend them. I am foremost
of all the Trojan warriors to stave the day of bondage from off them;
as for you, vultures shall devour you here. Poor wretch, Achilles
with all his bravery availed you nothing; and yet I ween when you
left him he charged you straitly saying, 'Come not back to the ships,
knight Patroclus, till you have rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous
Hector about his body. Thus I ween did he charge you, and your fool's
heart answered him 'yea' within you." 

Then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, O knight Patroclus:
"Hector, vaunt as you will, for Jove the son of Saturn and Apollo
have vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have vanquished me so
easily, and they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had
twenty such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen
before my spear. Fate and the son of Leto have overpowered me, and
among mortal men Euphorbus; you are yourself third only in the killing
of me. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, you too shall
live but for a little season; death and the day of your doom are close
upon you, and they will lay you low by the hand of Achilles son of
Aeacus." 

When he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left
his body and flitted down to the house of Hades, mourning its sad
fate and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. Dead
though he was, Hector still spoke to him saying, "Patroclus, why should
you thus foretell my doom? Who knows but Achilles, son of lovely Thetis,
may be smitten by my spear and die before me?" 

As he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his
foot upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. He
then went spear in hand after Automedon, squire of the fleet descendant
of Aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which
the gods had given as a rich gift to Peleus bore him swiftly from
the field. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XVII

Brave Menelaus son of Atreus now came to know that Patroclus had
fallen, and made his way through the front ranks clad in full armour
to bestride him. As a cow stands lowing over her first calf, even
so did yellow-haired Menelaus bestride Patroclus. He held his round
shield and his spear in front of him, resolute to kill any who should
dare face him. But the son of Panthous had also noted the body, and
came up to Menelaus saying, "Menelaus, son of Atreus, draw back, leave
the body, and let the bloodstained spoils be. I was first of the Trojans
and their brave allies to drive my spear into Patroclus, let me, therefore,
have my full glory among the Trojans, or I will take aim and kill
you." 

To this Menelaus answered in great anger "By father Jove, boasting
is an ill thing. The pard is not more bold, nor the lion nor savage
wild-boar, which is fiercest and most dauntless of all creatures,
than are the proud sons of Panthous. Yet Hyperenor did not see out
the days of his youth when he made light of me and withstood me, deeming
me the meanest soldier among the Danaans. His own feet never bore
him back to gladden his wife and parents. Even so shall I make an
end of you too, if you withstand me; get you back into the crowd and
do not face me, or it shall be worse for you. Even a fool may be wise
after the event." 

Euphorbus would not listen, and said, "Now indeed, Menelaus, shall
you pay for the death of my brother over whom you vaunted, and whose
wife you widowed in her bridal chamber, while you brought grief unspeakable
on his parents. I shall comfort these poor people if I bring your
head and armour and place them in the hands of Panthous and noble
Phrontis. The time is come when this matter shall be fought out and
settled, for me or against me." 

As he spoke he struck Menelaus full on the shield, but the spear did
not go through, for the shield turned its point. Menelaus then took
aim, praying to father Jove as he did so; Euphorbus was drawing back,
and Menelaus struck him about the roots of his throat, leaning his
whole weight on the spear, so as to drive it home. The point went
clean through his neck, and his armour rang rattling round him as
he fell heavily to the ground. His hair which was like that of the
Graces, and his locks so deftly bound in bands of silver and gold,
were all bedrabbled with blood. As one who has grown a fine young
olive tree in a clear space where there is abundance of water- the
plant is full of promise, and though the winds beat upon it from every
quarter it puts forth its white blossoms till the blasts of some fierce
hurricane sweep down upon it and level it with the ground- even so
did Menelaus strip the fair youth Euphorbus of his armour after he
had slain him. Or as some fierce lion upon the mountains in the pride
of his strength fastens on the finest heifer in a herd as it is feeding-
first he breaks her neck with his strong jaws, and then gorges on
her blood and entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue and cry against
him, but they stand aloof and will not come close to him, for they
are pale with fear- even so no one had the courage to face valiant
Menelaus. The son of Atreus would have then carried off the armour
of the son of Panthous with ease, had not Phoebus Apollo been angry,
and in the guise of Mentes chief of the Cicons incited Hector to attack
him. "Hector," said he, "you are now going after the horses of the
noble son of Aeacus, but you will not take them; they cannot be kept
in hand and driven by mortal man, save only by Achilles, who is son
to an immortal mother. Meanwhile Menelaus son of Atreus has bestridden
the body of Patroclus and killed the noblest of the Trojans, Euphorbus
son of Panthous, so that he can fight no more." 

The god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of
Hector was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the ranks
and saw Euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still flowing
from his wound, and Menelaus stripping him of his armour. On this
he made his way to the front like a flame of fire, clad in his gleaming
armour, and crying with a loud voice. When the son of Atreus heard
him, he said to himself in his dismay, "Alas! what shall I do? I may
not let the Trojans take the armour of Patroclus who has fallen fighting
on my behalf, lest some Danaan who sees me should cry shame upon me.
Still if for my honour's sake I fight Hector and the Trojans single-handed,
they will prove too many for me, for Hector is bringing them up in
force. Why, however, should I thus hesitate? When a man fights in
despite of heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue
it. Let no Danaan think ill of me if I give place to Hector, for the
hand of heaven is with him. Yet, if I could find Ajax, the two of
us would fight Hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body
of Patroclus for Achilles son of Peleus. This, of many evils would
be the least." 

While he was thus in two minds, the Trojans came up to him with Hector
at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about
like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a
stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks
sulkily off- even so did Menelaus son of Atreus turn and leave the
body of Patroclus. When among the body of his men, he looked around
for mighty Ajax son of Telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme
left of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep
on fighting, for Phoebus Apollo had spread a great panic among them.
He ran up to him and said, "Ajax, my good friend, come with me at
once to dead Patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to Achilles-
as for his armour, Hector already has it." 

These words stirred the heart of Ajax, and he made his way among the
front ranks, Menelaus going with him. Hector had stripped Patroclus
of his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take
the body to fling before the dogs of Troy. But Ajax came up with his
shield like wall before him, on which Hector withdrew under shelter
of his men, and sprang on to his chariot, giving the armour over to
the Trojans to take to the city, as a great trophy for himself; Ajax,
therefore, covered the body of Patroclus with his broad shield and
bestrode him; as a lion stands over his whelps if hunters have come
upon him in a forest when he is with his little ones- in the pride
and fierceness of his strength he draws his knit brows down till they
cover his eyes- even so did Ajax bestride the body of Patroclus, and
by his side stood Menelaus son of Atreus, nursing great sorrow in
his heart. 

Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus looked fiercely at Hector and rebuked
him sternly. "Hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight
you are sadly wanting. A runaway like yourself has no claim to so
great a reputation. Think how you may now save your town and citadel
by the hands of your own people born in Ilius; for you will get no
Lycians to fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their
incessant hardships. Are you likely, sir, to do anything to help a
man of less note, after leaving Sarpedon, who was at once your guest
and comrade in arms, to be the spoil and prey of the Danaans? So long
as he lived he did good service both to your city and yourself; yet
you had no stomach to save his body from the dogs. If the Lycians
will listen to me, they will go home and leave Troy to its fate. If
the Trojans had any of that daring fearless spirit which lays hold
of men who are fighting for their country and harassing those who
would attack it, we should soon bear off Patroclus into Ilius. Could
we get this dead man away and bring him into the city of Priam, the
Argives would readily give up the armour of Sarpedon, and we should
get his body to boot. For he whose squire has been now killed is the
foremost man at the ships of the Achaeans- he and his close-fighting
followers. Nevertheless you dared not make a stand against Ajax, nor
face him, eye to eye, with battle all round you, for he is a braver
man than you are." 

Hector scowled at him and answered, "Glaucus, you should know better.
I have held you so far as a man of more understanding than any in
all Lycia, but now I despise you for saying that I am afraid of Ajax.
I fear neither battle nor the din of chariots, but Jove's will is
stronger than ours; Jove at one time makes even a strong man draw
back and snatches victory from his grasp, while at another he will
set him on to fight. Come hither then, my friend, stand by me and
see indeed whether I shall play the coward the whole day through as
you say, or whether I shall not stay some even of the boldest Danaans
from fighting round the body of Patroclus." 

As he spoke he called loudly on the Trojans saying, "Trojans, Lycians,
and Dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and
fight might and main, while I put on the goodly armour of Achilles,
which I took when I killed Patroclus." 

With this Hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men
who were taking the armour of Achilles to Troy, but had not yet got
far. Standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed
his armour. His own he sent to the strong city of Ilius and to the
Trojans, while he put on the immortal armour of the son of Peleus,
which the gods had given to Peleus, who in his age gave it to his
son; but the son did not grow old in his father's armour.

When Jove, lord of the storm-cloud, saw Hector standing aloof and
arming himself in the armour of the son of Peleus, he wagged his head
and muttered to himself saying, "A! poor wretch, you arm in the armour
of a hero, before whom many another trembles, and you reck nothing
of the doom that is already close upon you. You have killed his comrade
so brave and strong, but it was not well that you should strip the
armour from his head and shoulders. I do indeed endow you with great
might now, but as against this you shall not return from battle to
lay the armour of the son of Peleus before Andromache." 

The son of Saturn bowed his portentous brows, and Hector fitted the
armour to his body, while terrible Mars entered into him, and filled
his whole body with might and valour. With a shout he strode in among
the allies, and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to
all of them like the great son of Peleus himself. He went about among
them and cheered them on- Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, Thersilochus,
Asteropaeus, Deisenor and Hippothous, Phorcys, Chromius and Ennomus
the augur. All these did he exhort saying, "Hear me, allies from other
cities who are here in your thousands, it was not in order to have
a crowd about me that I called you hither each from his several city,
but that with heart and soul you might defend the wives and little
ones of the Trojans from the fierce Achaeans. For this do I oppress
my people with your food and the presents that make you rich. Therefore
turn, and charge at the foe, to stand or fall as is the game of war;
whoever shall bring Patroclus, dead though he be, into the hands of
the Trojans, and shall make Ajax give way before him, I will give
him one half of the spoils while I keep the other. He will thus share
like honour with myself." 

When he had thus spoken they charged full weight upon the Danaans
with their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran
high that he should force Ajax son of Telamon to yield up the body-
fools that they were, for he was about to take the lives of many.
Then Ajax said to Menelaus, "My good friend Menelaus, you and I shall
hardly come out of this fight alive. I am less concerned for the body
of Patroclus, who will shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures
of Troy, than for the safety of my own head and yours. Hector has
wrapped us round in a storm of battle from every quarter, and our
destruction seems now certain. Call then upon the princes of the Danaans
if there is any who can hear us." 

Menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the Danaans for help at the
top of his voice. "My friends," he cried, "princes and counsellors
of the Argives, all you who with Agamemnon and Menelaus drink at the
public cost, and give orders each to his own people as Jove vouchsafes
him power and glory, the fight is so thick about me that I cannot
distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden,
and think it shame that Patroclus should become meat and morsel for
Trojan hounds." 

Fleet Ajax son of Oileus heard him and was first to force his way
through the fight and run to help him. Next came Idomeneus and Meriones
his esquire, peer of murderous Mars. As for the others that came into
the fight after these, who of his own self could name them?

The Trojans with Hector at their head charged in a body. As a great
wave that comes thundering in at the mouth of some heaven-born river,
and the rocks that jut into the sea ring with the roar of the breakers
that beat and buffet them- even with such a roar did the Trojans come
on; but the Achaeans in singleness of heart stood firm about the son
of Menoetius, and fenced him with their bronze shields. Jove, moreover,
hid the brightness of their helmets in a thick cloud, for he had borne
no grudge against the son of Menoetius while he was still alive and
squire to the descendant of Aeacus; therefore he was loth to let him
fall a prey to the dogs of his foes the Trojans, and urged his comrades
on to defend him. 

At first the Trojans drove the Achaeans back, and they withdrew from
the dead man daunted. The Trojans did not succeed in killing any one,
nevertheless they drew the body away. But the Achaeans did not lose
it long, for Ajax, foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus
alike in stature and prowess, quickly rallied them and made towards
the front like a wild boar upon the mountains when he stands at bay
in the forest glades and routs the hounds and lusty youths that have
attacked him- even so did Ajax son of Telamon passing easily in among
the phalanxes of the Trojans, disperse those who had bestridden Patroclus
and were most bent on winning glory by dragging him off to their city.
At this moment Hippothous brave son of the Pelasgian Lethus, in his
zeal for Hector and the Trojans, was dragging the body off by the
foot through the press of the fight, having bound a strap round the
sinews near the ancle; but a mischief soon befell him from which none
of those could save him who would have gladly done so, for the son
of Telamon sprang forward and smote him on his bronze-cheeked helmet.
The plumed headpiece broke about the point of the weapon, struck at
once by the spear and by the strong hand of Ajax, so that the bloody
brain came oozing out through the crest-socket. His strength then
failed him and he let Patroclus' foot drop from his hand, as he fell
full length dead upon the body; thus he died far from the fertile
land of Larissa, and never repaid his parents the cost of bringing
him up, for his life was cut short early by the spear of mighty Ajax.
Hector then took aim at Ajax with a spear, but he saw it coming and
just managed to avoid it; the spear passed on and struck Schedius
son of noble Iphitus, captain of the Phoceans, who dwelt in famed
Panopeus and reigned over much people; it struck him under the middle
of the collar-bone the bronze point went right through him, coming
out at the bottom of his shoulder-blade, and his armour rang rattling
round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Ajax in his turn struck
noble Phorcys son of Phaenops in the middle of the belly as he was
bestriding Hippothous, and broke the plate of his cuirass; whereon
the spear tore out his entrails and he clutched the ground in his
palm as he fell to earth. Hector and those who were in the front rank
then gave ground, while the Argives raised a loud cry of triumph,
and drew off the bodies of Phorcys and Hippothous which they stripped
presently of their armour. 

The Trojans would now have been worsted by the brave Achaeans and
driven back to Ilius through their own cowardice, while the Argives,
so great was their courage and endurance, would have achieved a triumph
even against the will of Jove, if Apollo had not roused Aeneas, in
the likeness of Periphas son of Epytus, an attendant who had grown
old in the service of Aeneas' aged father, and was at all times devoted
to him. In his likeness, then, Apollo said, "Aeneas, can you not manage,
even though heaven be against us, to save high Ilius? I have known
men, whose numbers, courage, and self-reliance have saved their people
in spite of Jove, whereas in this case he would much rather give victory
to us than to the Danaans, if you would only fight instead of being
so terribly afraid." 

Aeneas knew Apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to
Hector saying, "Hector and all other Trojans and allies, shame on
us if we are beaten by the Achaeans and driven back to Ilius through
our own cowardice. A god has just come up to me and told me that Jove
the supreme disposer will be with us. Therefore let us make for the
Danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they bear away dead Patroclus
to the ships." 

As he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied
and again faced the Achaeans. Aeneas speared Leiocritus son of Arisbas,
a valiant follower of Lycomedes, and Lycomedes was moved with pity
as he saw him fall; he therefore went close up, and speared Apisaon
son of Hippasus shepherd of his people in the liver under the midriff,
so that he died; he had come from fertile Paeonia and was the best
man of them all after Asteropaeus. Asteropaeus flew forward to avenge
him and attack the Danaans, but this might no longer be, inasmuch
as those about Patroclus were well covered by their shields, and held
their spears in front of them, for Ajax had given them strict orders
that no man was either to give ground, or to stand out before the
others, but all were to hold well together about the body and fight
hand to hand. Thus did huge Ajax bid them, and the earth ran red with
blood as the corpses fell thick on one another alike on the side of
the Trojans and allies, and on that of the Danaans; for these last,
too, fought no bloodless fight though many fewer of them perished,
through the care they took to defend and stand by one another.

Thus did they fight as it were a flaming fire; it seemed as though
it had gone hard even with the sun and moon, for they were hidden
over all that part where the bravest heroes were fighting about the
dead son of Menoetius, whereas the other Danaans and Achaeans fought
at their ease in full daylight with brilliant sunshine all round them,
and there was not a cloud to be seen neither on plain nor mountain.
These last moreover would rest for a while and leave off fighting,
for they were some distance apart and beyond the range of one another's
weapons, whereas those who were in the thick of the fray suffered
both from battle and darkness. All the best of them were being worn
out by the great weight of their armour, but the two valiant heroes,
Thrasymedes and Antilochus, had not yet heard of the death of Patroclus,
and believed him to be still alive and leading the van against the
Trojans; they were keeping themselves in reserve against the death
or rout of their own comrades, for so Nestor had ordered when he sent
them from the ships into battle. 

Thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the sweat
of their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on their hands
and eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet son of Peleus.
It was as when a man gives a great ox-hide all drenched in fat to
his men, and bids them stretch it; whereon they stand round it in
a ring and tug till the moisture leaves it, and the fat soaks in for
the many that pull at it, and it is well stretched- even so did the
two sides tug the dead body hither and thither within the compass
of but a little space- the Trojans steadfastly set on drag ing it
into Ilius, while the Achaeans were no less so on taking it to their
ships; and fierce was the fight between them. Not Mars himself the
lord of hosts, nor yet Minerva, even in their fullest fury could make
light of such a battle. 

Such fearful turmoil of men and horses did Jove on that day ordain
round the body of Patroclus. Meanwhile Achilles did not know that
he had fallen, for the fight was under the wall of Troy a long way
off the ships. He had no idea, therefore, that Patroclus was dead,
and deemed that he would return alive as soon as he had gone close
up to the gates. He knew that he was not to sack the city neither
with nor without himself, for his mother had often told him this when
he had sat alone with her, and she had informed him of the counsels
of great Jove. Now, however, she had not told him how great a disaster
had befallen him in the death of the one who was far dearest to him
of all his comrades. 

The others still kept on charging one another round the body with
their pointed spears and killing each other. Then would one say, "My
friends, we can never again show our faces at the ships- better, and
greatly better, that earth should open and swallow us here in this
place, than that we should let the Trojans have the triumph of bearing
off Patroclus to their city." 

The Trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying, "Friends,
though we fall to a man beside this body, let none shrink from fighting."
With such words did they exhort each other. They fought and fought,
and an iron clank rose through the void air to the brazen vault of
heaven. The horses of the descendant of Aeacus stood out of the fight
and wept when they heard that their driver had been laid low by the
hand of murderous Hector. Automedon, valiant son of Diores, lashed
them again and again; many a time did he speak kindly to them, and
many a time did he upbraid them, but they would neither go back to
the ships by the waters of the broad Hellespont, nor yet into battle
among the Achaeans; they stood with their chariot stock still, as
a pillar set over the tomb of some dead man or woman, and bowed their
heads to the ground. Hot tears fell from their eyes as they mourned
the loss of their charioteer, and their noble manes drooped all wet
from under the yokestraps on either side the yoke. 

The son of Saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. He wagged
his head, and muttered to himself, saying, "Poor things, why did we
give you to King Peleus who is a mortal, while you are yourselves
ageless and immortal? Was it that you might share the sorrows that
befall mankind? for of all creatures that live and move upon the earth
there is none so pitiable as he is- still, Hector son of Priam shall
drive neither you nor your chariot. I will not have it. It is enough
that he should have the armour over which he vaunts so vainly. Furthermore
I will give you strength of heart and limb to bear Automedon safely
to the ships from battle, for I shall let the Trojans triumph still
further, and go on killing till they reach the ships; whereon night
shall fall and darkness overshadow the land." 

As he spoke he breathed heart and strength into the horses so that
they shook the dust from out of their manes, and bore their chariot
swiftly into the fight that raged between Trojans and Achaeans. Behind
them fought Automedon full of sorrow for his comrade, as a vulture
amid a flock of geese. In and out, and here and there, full speed
he dashed amid the throng of the Trojans, but for all the fury of
his pursuit he killed no man, for he could not wield his spear and
keep his horses in hand when alone in the chariot; at last, however,
a comrade, Alcimedon, son of Laerces son of Haemon caught sight of
him and came up behind his chariot. "Automedon," said he, "what god
has put this folly into your heart and robbed you of your right mind,
that you fight the Trojans in the front rank single-handed? He who
was your comrade is slain, and Hector plumes himself on being armed
in the armour of the descendant of Aeacus." 

Automedon son of Diores answered, "Alcimedon, there is no one else
who can control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you can,
save only Patroclus- while he was alive- peer of gods in counsel.
Take then the whip and reins, while I go down from the car and fight.

Alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and reins,
while Automedon leaped from off the car. When Hector saw him he said
to Aeneas who was near him, "Aeneas, counsellor of the mail-clad Trojans,
I see the steeds of the fleet son of Aeacus come into battle with
weak hands to drive them. I am sure, if you think well, that we might
take them; they will not dare face us if we both attack them."

The valiant son of Anchises was of the same mind, and the pair went
right on, with their shoulders covered under shields of tough dry
ox-hide, overlaid with much bronze. Chromius and Aretus went also
with them, and their hearts beat high with hope that they might kill
the men and capture the horses- fools that they were, for they were
not to return scatheless from their meeting with Automedon, who prayed
to father Jove and was forthwith filled with courage and strength
abounding. He turned to his trusty comrade Alcimedon and said, "Alcimedon,
keep your horses so close up that I may feel their breath upon my
back; I doubt that we shall not stay Hector son of Priam till he has
killed us and mounted behind the horses; he will then either spread
panic among the ranks of the Achaeans, or himself be killed among
the foremost." 

On this he cried out to the two Ajaxes and Menelaus, "Ajaxes captains
of the Argives, and Menelaus, give the dead body over to them that
are best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for
Hector and Aeneas who are the two best men among the Trojans, are
pressing us hard in the full tide of war. Nevertheless the issue lies
on the lap of heaven, I will therefore hurl my spear and leave the
rest to Jove." 

He poised and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the round
shield of Aretus, and went right through it for the shield stayed
it not, so that it was driven through his belt into the lower part
of his belly. As when some sturdy youth, axe in hand, deals his blow
behind the horns of an ox and severs the tendons at the back of its
neck so that it springs forward and then drops, even so did Aretus
give one bound and then fall on his back the spear quivering in his
body till it made an end of him. Hector then aimed a spear at Automedon
but he saw it coming and stooped forward to avoid it, so that it flew
past him and the point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went
on quivering till Mars robbed it of its force. They would then have
fought hand to hand with swords had not the two Ajaxes forced their
way through the crowd when they heard their comrade calling, and parted
them for all their fury- for Hector, Aeneas, and Chromius were afraid
and drew back, leaving Aretus to lie there struck to the heart. Automedon,
peer of fleet Mars, then stripped him of his armour and vaunted over
him saying, "I have done little to assuage my sorrow for the son of
Menoetius, for the man I have killed is not so good as he was."

As he spoke he took the blood-stained spoils and laid them upon his
chariot; then he mounted the car with his hands and feet all steeped
in gore as a lion that has been gorging upon a bull. 

And now the fierce groanful fight again raged about Patroclus, for
Minerva came down from heaven and roused its fury by the command of
far-seeing Jove, who had changed his mind and sent her to encourage
the Danaans. As when Jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token
to mankind either of war or of the chill storms that stay men from
their labour and plague the flocks- even so, wrapped in such radiant
raiment, did Minerva go in among the host and speak man by man to
each. First she took the form and voice of Phoenix and spoke to Menelaus
son of Atreus, who was standing near her. "Menelaus," said she, "it
will be shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade
of Achilles under the walls of Troy. Therefore be staunch, and urge
your men to be so also." 

Menelaus answered, "Phoenix, my good old friend, may Minerva vouchsafe
me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall I stand by
Patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but Hector
is as a raging fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for Jove
is now granting him a time of triumph." 

Minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the
other gods. Therefore she put strength into his knees and shoulders,
and made him as bold as a fly, which, though driven off will yet come
again and bite if it can, so dearly does it love man's blood- even
so bold as this did she make him as he stood over Patroclus and threw
his spear. Now there was among the Trojans a man named Podes, son
of Eetion, who was both rich and valiant. Hector held him in the highest
honour for he was his comrade and boon companion; the spear of Menelaus
struck this man in the girdle just as he had turned in flight, and
went right through him. Whereon he fell heavily forward, and Menelaus
son of Atreus drew off his body from the Trojans into the ranks of
his own people. 

Apollo then went up to Hector and spurred him on to fight, in the
likeness of Phaenops son of Asius who lived in Abydos and was the
most favoured of all Hector's guests. In his likeness Apollo said,
"Hector, who of the Achaeans will fear you henceforward now that you
have quailed before Menelaus who has ever been rated poorly as a soldier?
Yet he has now got a corpse away from the Trojans single-handed, and
has slain your own true comrade, a man brave among the foremost, Podes
son of Eetion. 

A dark cloud of grief fell upon Hector as he heard, and he made his
way to the front clad in full armour. Thereon the son of Saturn seized
his bright tasselled aegis, and veiled Ida in cloud: he sent forth
his lightnings and his thunders, and as he shook his aegis he gave
victory to the Trojans and routed the Achaeans. 

The panic was begun by Peneleos the Boeotian, for while keeping his
face turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear on the
upper part of the shoulder; a spear thrown by Polydamas had grazed
the top of the bone, for Polydamas had come up to him and struck him
from close at hand. Then Hector in close combat struck Leitus son
of noble Alectryon in the hand by the wrist, and disabled him from
fighting further. He looked about him in dismay, knowing that never
again should he wield spear in battle with the Trojans. While Hector
was in pursuit of Leitus, Idomeneus struck him on the breastplate
over his chest near the nipple; but the spear broke in the shaft,
and the Trojans cheered aloud. Hector then aimed at Idomeneus son
of Deucalion as he was standing on his chariot, and very narrowly
missed him, but the spear hit Coiranus, a follower and charioteer
of Meriones who had come with him from Lyctus. Idomeneus had left
the ships on foot and would have afforded a great triumph to the Trojans
if Coiranus had not driven quickly up to him, he therefore brought
life and rescue to Idomeneus, but himself fell by the hand of murderous
Hector. For Hector hit him on the jaw under the ear; the end of the
spear drove out his teeth and cut his tongue in two pieces, so that
he fell from his chariot and let the reins fall to the ground. Meriones
gathered them up from the ground and took them into his own hands,
then he said to Idomeneus, "Lay on, till you get back to the ships,
for you must see that the day is no longer ours." 

On this Idomeneus lashed the horses to the ships, for fear had taken
hold upon him. 

Ajax and Menelaus noted how Jove had turned the scale in favour of
the Trojans, and Ajax was first to speak. "Alas," said he, "even a
fool may see that father Jove is helping the Trojans. All their weapons
strike home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that
hurls them, Jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them
without effect. What, then, will be best both as regards rescuing
the body, and our return to the joy of our friends who will be grieving
as they look hitherwards; for they will make sure that nothing can
now check the terrible hands of Hector, and that he will fling himself
upon our ships. I wish that some one would go and tell the son of
Peleus at once, for I do not think he can have yet heard the sad news
that the dearest of his friends has fallen. But I can see not a man
among the Achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike
hidden in darkness. O father Jove, lift this cloud from over the sons
of the Achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that
we perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight." 

Father Jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. Forthwith
he chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and
all the fighting was revealed. Ajax then said to Menelaus, "Look,
Menelaus, and if Antilochus son of Nestor be still living, send him
at once to tell Achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his
comrades has fallen." 

Menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a stockyard-
the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep watch
the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of their
herd. In his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain, for
darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt
him for all his hunger, so in the morning he slinks sulkily away-
even so did Menelaus sorely against his will leave Patroclus, in great
fear lest the Achaeans should be driven back in rout and let him fall
into the hands of the foe. He charged Meriones and the two Ajaxes
straitly saying, "Ajaxes and Meriones, leaders of the Argives, now
indeed remember how good Patroclus was; he was ever courteous while
alive, bear it in mind now that he is dead." 

With this Menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an eagle,
whose sight they say is keener than that of any other bird- however
high he may be in the heavens, not a hare that runs can escape him
by crouching under bush or thicket, for he will swoop down upon it
and make an end of it- even so, O Menelaus, did your keen eyes range
round the mighty host of your followers to see if you could find the
son of Nestor still alive. Presently Menelaus saw him on the extreme
left of the battle cheering on his men and exhorting them to fight
boldly. Menelaus went up to him and said, "Antilochus, come here and
listen to sad news, which I would indeed were untrue. You must see
with your own eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the Danaans,
and giving victory to the Trojans. Patroclus has fallen, who was the
bravest of the Achaeans, and sorely will the Danaans miss him. Run
instantly to the ships and tell Achilles, that he may come to rescue
the body and bear it to the ships. As for the armour, Hector already
has it." 

Antilochus was struck with horror. For a long time he was speechless;
his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he
did as Menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given
his armour to a comrade, Laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round,
close beside him. 

Thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news
to Achilles son of Peleus. Nor were you, O Menelaus, minded to succour
his harassed comrades, when Antilochus had left the Pylians- and greatly
did they miss him- but he sent them noble Thrasymedes, and himself
went back to Patroclus. He came running up to the two Ajaxes and said,
"I have sent Antilochus to the ships to tell Achilles, but rage against
Hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour.
What then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead,
and our own escape from death amid the battle-cries of the Trojans?"

Ajax answered, "Menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and Meriones
stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while we
two behind you keep off Hector and the Trojans, one in heart as in
name, and long used to fighting side by side with one another."

On this Menelaus and Meriones took the dead man in their arms and
lifted him high aloft with a great effort. The Trojan host raised
a hue and cry behind them when they saw the Achaeans bearing the body
away, and flew after them like hounds attacking a wounded boar at
the loo of a band of young huntsmen. For a while the hounds fly at
him as though they would tear him in pieces, but now and again he
turns on them in a fury, scaring and scattering them in all directions-
even so did the Trojans for a while charge in a body, striking with
sword and with spears pointed ai both the ends, but when the two Ajaxes
faced them and stood at bay, they would turn pale and no man dared
press on to fight further about the dead. 

In this wise did the two heroes strain every nerve to bear the body
to the ships out of the fight. The battle raged round them like fierce
flames that when once kindled spread like wildfire over a city, and
the houses fall in the glare of its burning- even such was the roar
and tramp of men and horses that pursued them as they bore Patroclus
from the field. Or as mules that put forth all their strength to draw
some beam or great piece of ship's timber down a rough mountain-track,
and they pant and sweat as they, go even so did Menelaus and pant
and sweat as they bore the body of Patroclus. Behind them the two
Ajaxes held stoutly out. As some wooded mountain-spur that stretches
across a plain will turn water and check the flow even of a great
river, nor is there any stream strong enough to break through it-
even so did the two Ajaxes face the Trojans and stern the tide of
their fighting though they kept pouring on towards them and foremost
among them all was Aeneas son of Anchises with valiant Hector. As
a flock of daws or starlings fall to screaming and chattering when
they see a falcon, foe to i'll small birds, come soaring near them,
even so did the Achaean youth raise a babel of cries as they fled
before Aeneas and Hector, unmindful of their former prowess. In the
rout of the Danaans much goodly armour fell round about the trench,
and of fighting there was no end. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XVIII

Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the
fleet runner Antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached Achilles,
and found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that which was
indeed too surely true. "Alas," said he to himself in the heaviness
of his heart, "why are the Achaeans again scouring the plain and flocking
towards the ships? Heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that
sorrow upon me of which my mother Thetis spoke, saying that while
I was yet alive the bravest of the Myrmidons should fall before the
Trojans, and see the light of the sun no longer. I fear the brave
son of Menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet I bade
him return to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were
bringing fire against them, and not join battle with Hector."

As he was thus pondering, the son of Nestor came up to him and told
his sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "Alas," he cried, "son of
noble Peleus, I bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were
untrue. Patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked
body- for Hector holds his armour." 

A dark cloud of grief fell upon Achilles as he listened. He filled
both hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head,
disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refuse settle over his
shirt so fair and new. He flung himself down all huge and hugely at
full length, and tore his hair with his hands. The bondswomen whom
Achilles and Patroclus had taken captive screamed aloud for grief,
beating their breasts, and with their limbs failing them for sorrow.
Antilochus bent over him the while, weeping and holding both his hands
as he lay groaning for he feared that he might plunge a knife into
his own throat. Then Achilles gave a loud cry and his mother heard
him as she was sitting in the depths of the sea by the old man her
father, whereon she screamed, and all the goddesses daughters of Nereus
that dwelt at the bottom of the sea, came gathering round her. There
were Glauce, Thalia and Cymodoce, Nesaia, Speo, thoe and dark-eyed
Halie, Cymothoe, Actaea and Limnorea, Melite, Iaera, Amphithoe and
Agave, Doto and Proto, Pherusa and Dynamene, Dexamene, Amphinome and
Callianeira, Doris, Panope, and the famous sea-nymph Galatea, Nemertes,
Apseudes and Callianassa. There were also Clymene, Ianeira and Ianassa,
Maera, Oreithuia and Amatheia of the lovely locks, with other Nereids
who dwell in the depths of the sea. The crystal cave was filled with
their multitude and they all beat their breasts while Thetis led them
in their lament. 

"Listen," she cried, "sisters, daughters of Nereus, that you may hear
the burden of my sorrows. Alas, woe is me, woe in that I have borne
the most glorious of offspring. I bore him fair and strong, hero among
heroes, and he shot up as a sapling; I tended him as a plant in a
goodly garden, and sent him with his ships to Ilius to fight the Trojans,
but never shall I welcome him back to the house of Peleus. So long
as he lives to look upon the light of the sun he is in heaviness,
and though I go to him I cannot help him. Nevertheless I will go,
that I may see my dear son and learn what sorrow has befallen him
though he is still holding aloof from battle." 

She left the cave as she spoke, while the others followed weeping
after, and the waves opened a path before them. When they reached
the rich plain of Troy, they came up out of the sea in a long line
on to the sands, at the place where the ships of the Myrmidons were
drawn up in close order round the tents of Achilles. His mother went
up to him as he lay groaning; she laid her hand upon his head and
spoke piteously, saying, "My son, why are you thus weeping? What sorrow
has now befallen you? Tell me; hide it not from me. Surely Jove has
granted you the prayer you made him, when you lifted up your hands
and besought him that the Achaeans might all of them be pent up at
their ships, and rue it bitterly in that you were no longer with them."

Achilles groaned and answered, "Mother, Olympian Jove has indeed vouchsafed
me the fulfilment of my prayer, but what boots it to me, seeing that
my dear comrade Patroclus has fallen- he whom I valued more than all
others, and loved as dearly as my own life? I have lost him; aye,
and Hector when he had killed him stripped the wondrous armour, so
glorious to behold, which the gods gave to Peleus when they laid you
in the couch of a mortal man. Would that you were still dwelling among
the immortal sea-nymphs, and that Peleus had taken to himself some
mortal bride. For now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the
death of that son whom you can never welcome home- nay, I will not
live nor go about among mankind unless Hector fall by my spear, and
thus pay me for having slain Patroclus son of Menoetius."

Thetis wept and answered, "Then, my son, is your end near at hand-
for your own death awaits you full soon after that of Hector."

Then said Achilles in his great grief, "I would die here and now,
in that I could not save my comrade. He has fallen far from home,
and in his hour of need my hand was not there to help him. What is
there for me? Return to my own land I shall not, and I have brought
no saving neither to Patroclus nor to my other comrades of whom so
many have been slain by mighty Hector; I stay here by my ships a bootless
burden upon the earth, I, who in fight have no peer among the Achaeans,
though in council there are better than I. Therefore, perish strife
both from among gods and men, and anger, wherein even a righteous
man will harden his heart- which rises up in the soul of a man like
smoke, and the taste thereof is sweeter than drops of honey. Even
so has Agamemnon angered me. And yet- so be it, for it is over; I
will force my soul into subjection as I needs must; I will go; I will
pursue Hector who has slain him whom I loved so dearly, and will then
abide my doom when it may please Jove and the other gods to send it.
Even Hercules, the best beloved of Jove- even he could not escape
the hand of death, but fate and Juno's fierce anger laid him low,
as I too shall lie when I am dead if a like doom awaits me. Till then
I will win fame, and will bid Trojan and Dardanian women wring tears
from their tender cheeks with both their hands in the grievousness
of their great sorrow; thus shall they know that he who has held aloof
so long will hold aloof no longer. Hold me not back, therefore, in
the love you bear me, for you shall not move me." 

Then silver-footed Thetis answered, "My son, what you have said is
true. It is well to save your comrades from destruction, but your
armour is in the hands of the Trojans; Hector bears it in triumph
upon his own shoulders. Full well I know that his vaunt shall not
be lasting, for his end is close at hand; go not, however, into the
press of battle till you see me return hither; to-morrow at break
of day I shall be here, and will bring you goodly armour from King
Vulcan." 

On this she left her brave son, and as she turned away she said to
the sea-nymphs her sisters, "Dive into the bosom of the sea and go
to the house of the old sea-god my father. Tell him everything; as
for me, I will go to the cunning workman Vulcan on high Olympus, and
ask him to provide my son with a suit of splendid armour."

When she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves, while
silver-footed Thetis went her way that she might bring the armour
for her son. 

Thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to Olympus, and meanwhile
the Achaeans were flying with loud cries before murderous Hector till
they reached the ships and the Hellespont, and they could not draw
the body of Mars's servant Patroclus out of reach of the weapons that
were showered upon him, for Hector son of Priam with his host and
horsemen had again caught up to him like the flame of a fiery furnace;
thrice did brave Hector seize him by the feet, striving with might
and main to draw him away and calling loudly on the Trojans, and thrice
did the two Ajaxes, clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him
from off the body; but all undaunted he would now charge into the
thick of the fight, and now again he would stand still and cry aloud,
but he would give no ground. As upland shepherds that cannot chase
some famished lion from a carcase, even so could not the two Ajaxes
scare Hector son of Priam from the body of Patroclus. 

And now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable
glory, had not Iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger
from Olympus to the son of Peleus and bidden him arm. She came secretly
without the knowledge of Jove and of the other gods, for Juno sent
her, and when she had got close to him she said, "Up, son of Peleus,
mightiest of all mankind; rescue Patroclus about whom this fearful
fight is now raging by the ships. Men are killing one another, the
Danaans in defence of the dead body, while the Trojans are trying
to hale it away, and take it to wind Ilius: Hector is the most furious
of them all; he is for cutting the head from the body and fixing it
on the stakes of the wall. Up, then, and bide here no longer; shrink
from the thought that Patroclus may become meat for the dogs of Troy.
Shame on you, should his body suffer any kind of outrage."

And Achilles said, "Iris, which of the gods was it that sent you to
me?" 

Iris answered, "It was Juno the royal spouse of Jove, but the son
of Saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of the
immortals who dwell on the snowy summits of Olympus." 

Then fleet Achilles answered her saying, "How can I go up into the
battle? They have my armour. My mother forbade me to arm till I should
see her come, for she promised to bring me goodly armour from Vulcan;
I know no man whose arms I can put on, save only the shield of Ajax
son of Telamon, and he surely must be fighting in the front rank and
wielding his spear about the body of dead Patroclus." 

Iris said, 'We know that your armour has been taken, but go as you
are; go to the deep trench and show yourelf before the Trojans, that
they may fear you and cease fighting. Thus will the fainting sons
of the Achaeans gain some brief breathing-time, which in battle may
hardly be." 

Iris left him when she had so spoken. But Achilles dear to Jove arose,
and Minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong shoulders;
she crowned his head with a halo of golden cloud from which she kindled
a glow of gleaming fire. As the smoke that goes up into heaven from
some city that is being beleaguered on an island far out at sea- all
day long do men sally from the city and fight their hardest, and at
the going down of the sun the line of beacon-fires blazes forth, flaring
high for those that dwell near them to behold, if so be that they
may come with their ships and succour them- even so did the light
flare from the head of Achilles, as he stood by the trench, going
beyond the wall- but he aid not join the Achaeans for he heeded the
charge which his mother laid upon him. 

There did he stand and shout aloud. Minerva also raised her voice
from afar, and spread terror unspeakable among the Trojans. Ringing
as the note of a trumpet that sounds alarm then the foe is at the
gates of a city, even so brazen was the voice of the son of Aeacus,
and when the Trojans heard its clarion tones they were dismayed; the
horses turned back with their chariots for they boded mischief, and
their drivers were awe-struck by the steady flame which the grey-eyed
goddess had kindled above the head of the great son of Peleus.

Thrice did Achilles raise his loud cry as he stood by the trench,
and thrice were the Trojans and their brave allies thrown into confusion;
whereon twelve of their noblest champions fell beneath the wheels
of their chariots and perished by their own spears. The Achaeans to
their great joy then drew Patroclus out of reach of the weapons, and
laid him on a litter: his comrades stood mourning round him, and among
them fleet Achilles who wept bitterly as he saw his true comrade lying
dead upon his bier. He had sent him out with horses and chariots into
battle, but his return he was not to welcome. 

Then Juno sent the busy sun, loth though he was, into the waters of
Oceanus; so he set, and the Achaeans had rest from the tug and turmoil
of war. 

Now the Trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoked their
horses and gathered in assembly before preparing their supper. They
kept their feet, nor would any dare to sit down, for fear had fallen
upon them all because Achilles had shown himself after having held
aloof so long from battle. Polydamas son of Panthous was first to
speak, a man of judgement, who alone among them could look both before
and after. He was comrade to Hector, and they had been born upon the
same night; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed
them thus:- 

"Look to it well, my friends; I would urge you to go back now to your
city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from
our walls. So long as this man was at enmity with Agamemnon the Achaeans
were easier to deal with, and I would have gladly camped by the ships
in the hope of taking them; but now I go in great fear of the fleet
son of Peleus; he is so daring that he will never bide here on the
plain whereon the Trojans and Achaeans fight with equal valour, but
he will try to storm our city and carry off our women. Do then as
I say, and let us retreat. For this is what will happen. The darkness
of night will for a time stay the son of Peleus, but if he find us
here in the morning when he sallies forth in full armour, we shall
have knowledge of him in good earnest. Glad indeed will he be who
can escape and get back to Ilius, and many a Trojan will become meat
for dogs and vultures may I never live to hear it. If we do as I say,
little though we may like it, we shall have strength in counsel during
the night, and the great gates with the doors that close them will
protect the city. At dawn we can arm and take our stand on the walls;
he will then rue it if he sallies from the ships to fight us. He will
go back when he has given his horses their fill of being driven all
whithers under our walls, and will be in no mind to try and force
his way into the city. Neither will he ever sack it, dogs shall devour
him ere he do so." 

Hector looked fiercely at him and answered, "Polydamas, your words
are not to my liking in that you bid us go back and be pent within
the city. Have you not had enough of being cooped up behind walls?
In the old-days the city of Priam was famous the whole world over
for its wealth of gold and bronze, but our treasures are wasted out
of our houses, and much goods have been sold away to Phrygia and fair
Meonia, for the hand of Jove has been laid heavily upon us. Now, therefore,
that the son of scheming Saturn has vouchsafed me to win glory here
and to hem the Achaeans in at their ships, prate no more in this fool's
wise among the people. You will have no man with you; it shall not
be; do all of you as I now say;- take your suppers in your companies
throughout the host, and keep your watches and be wakeful every man
of you. If any Trojan is uneasy about his possessions, let him gather
them and give them out among the people. Better let these, rather
than the Achaeans, have them. At daybreak we will arm and fight about
the ships; granted that Achilles has again come forward to defend
them, let it be as he will, but it shall go hard with him. I shall
not shun him, but will fight him, to fall or conquer. The god of war
deals out like measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain."

Thus spoke Hector; and the Trojans, fools that they were, shouted
in applause, for Pallas Minerva had robbed them of their understanding.
They gave ear to Hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words
of Polydamas no man would heed. They took their supper throughout
the host, and meanwhile through the whole night the Achaeans mourned
Patroclus, and the son of Peleus led them in their lament. He laid
his murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again
and again as a bearded lion when a man who was chasing deer has robbed
him of his young in some dense forest; when the lion comes back he
is furious, and searches dingle and dell to track the hunter if he
can find him, for he is mad with rage- even so with many a sigh did
Achilles speak among the Myrmidons saying, "Alas! vain were the words
with which I cheered the hero Menoetius in his own house; I said that
I would bring his brave son back again to Opoeis after he had sacked
Ilius and taken his share of the spoils- but Jove does not give all
men their heart's desire. The same soil shall be reddened here at
Troy by the blood of us both, for I too shall never be welcomed home
by the old knight Peleus, nor by my mother Thetis, but even in this
place shall the earth cover me. Nevertheless, O Patroclus, now that
I am left behind you, I will not bury you, till I have brought hither
the head and armour of mighty Hector who has slain you. Twelve noble
sons of Trojans will I behead before your bier to avenge you; till
I have done so you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women
of Troy and Dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of
arm when we sacked men's goodly cities, shall weep over you both night
and day." 

Then Achilles told his men to set a large tripod upon the fire that
they might wash the clotted gore from off Patroclus. Thereon they
set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire: they threw sticks
on to it to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played
about the belly of the tripod. When the water in the cauldron was
boiling they washed the body, anointed it with oil, and closed its
wounds with ointment that had been kept nine years. Then they laid
it on a bier and covered it with a linen cloth from head to foot,
and over this they laid a fair white robe. Thus all night long did
the Myrmidons gather round Achilles to mourn Patroclus. 

Then Jove said to Juno his sister-wife, "So, Queen Juno, you have
gained your end, and have roused fleet Achilles. One would think that
the Achaeans were of your own flesh and blood." 

And Juno answered, "Dread son of Saturn, why should you say this thing?
May not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than we do,
do what he can for another person? And shall not I- foremost of all
goddesses both by descent and as wife to you who reign in heaven-
devise evil for the Trojans if I am angry with them?" 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Thetis came to the house of Vulcan,
imperishable, star-bespangled, fairest of the abodes in heaven, a
house of bronze wrought by the lame god's own hands. She found him
busy with his bellows, sweating and hard at work, for he was making
twenty tripods that were to stand by the wall of his house, and he
set wheels of gold under them all that they might go of their own
selves to the assemblies of the gods, and come back again- marvels
indeed to see. They were finished all but the ears of cunning workmanship
which yet remained to be fixed to them: these he was now fixing, and
he was hammering at the rivets. While he was thus at work silver-footed
Thetis came to the house. Charis, of graceful head-dress, wife to
the far-famed lame god, came towards her as soon as she saw her, and
took her hand in her own, saying, "Why have you come to our house,
Thetis, honoured and ever welcome- for you do not visit us often?
Come inside and let me set refreshment before you." 

The goddess led the way as she spoke, and bade Thetis sit on a richly
decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under
her feet. Then she called Vulcan and said, "Vulcan, come here, Thetis
wants you"; and the far-famed lame god answered, "Then it is indeed
an august and honoured goddess who has come here; she it was that
took care of me when I was suffering from the heavy fall which I had
through my cruel mother's anger- for she would have got rid of me
because I was lame. It would have gone hardly with me had not Eurynome,
daughter of the ever-encircling waters of Oceanus, and Thetis, taken
me to their bosom. Nine years did I stay with them, and many beautiful
works in bronze, brooches, spiral armlets, cups, and chains, did I
make for them in their cave, with the roaring waters of Oceanus foaming
as they rushed ever past it; and no one knew, neither of gods nor
men, save only Thetis and Eurynome who took care of me. If, then,
Thetis has come to my house I must make her due requital for having
saved me; entertain her, therefore, with all hospitality, while I
put by my bellows and all my tools." 

On this the mighty monster hobbled off from his anvil, his thin legs
plying lustily under him. He set the bellows away from the fire, and
gathered his tools into a silver chest. Then he took a sponge and
washed his face and hands, his shaggy chest and brawny neck; he donned
his shirt, grasped his strong staff, and limped towards the door.
There were golden handmaids also who worked for him, and were like
real young women, with sense and reason, voice also and strength,
and all the learning of the immortals; these busied themselves as
the king bade them, while he drew near to Thetis, seated her upon
a goodly seat, and took her hand in his own, saying, "Why have you
come to our house, Thetis honoured and ever welcome- for you do not
visit us often? Say what you want, and I will do it for you at once
if I can, and if it can be done at all." 

Thetis wept and answered, "Vulcan, is there another goddess in Olympus
whom the son of Saturn has been pleased to try with so much affliction
as he has me? Me alone of the marine goddesses did he make subject
to a mortal husband, Peleus son of Aeacus, and sorely against my will
did I submit to the embraces of one who was but mortal, and who now
stays at home worn out with age. Neither is this all. Heaven vouchsafed
me a son, hero among heroes, and he shot up as a sapling. I tended
him as a plant in a goodly garden and sent him with his ships to Ilius
to fight the Trojans, but never shall I welcome him back to the house
of Peleus. So long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun,
he is in heaviness, and though I go to him I cannot help him; King
Agamemnon has made him give up the maiden whom the sons of the Achaeans
had awarded him, and he wastes with sorrow for her sake. Then the
Trojans hemmed the Achaeans in at their ships' sterns and would not
let them come forth; the elders, therefore, of the Argives besought
Achilles and offered him great treasure, whereon he refused to bring
deliverance to them himself, but put his own armour on Patroclus and
sent him into the fight with much people after him. All day long they
fought by the Scaean gates and would have taken the city there and
then, had not Apollo vouchsafed glory to Hector and slain the valiant
son of Menoetius after he had done the Trojans much evil. Therefore
I am suppliant at your knees if haply you may be pleased to provide
my son, whose end is near at hand, with helmet and shield, with goodly
greaves fitted with ancle-clasps, and with a breastplate, for he lost
his own when his true comrade fell at the hands of the Trojans, and
he now lies stretched on earth in the bitterness of his soul."

And Vulcan answered, "Take heart, and be no more disquieted about
this matter; would that I could hide him from death's sight when his
hour is come, so surely as I can find him armour that shall amaze
the eyes of all who behold it." 

When he had so said he left her and went to his bellows, turning them
towards the fire and bidding them do their office. Twenty bellows
blew upon the melting-pots, and they blew blasts of every kind, some
fierce to help him when he had need of them, and others less strong
as Vulcan willed it in the course of his work. He threw tough copper
into the fire, and tin, with silver and gold; he set his great anvil
on its block, and with one hand grasped his mighty hammer while he
took the tongs in the other. 

First he shaped the shield so great and strong, adorning it all over
and binding it round with a gleaming circuit in three layers; and
the baldric was made of silver. He made the shield in five thicknesses,
and with many a wonder did his cunning hand enrich it. 

He wrought the earth, the heavens, and the sea; the moon also at her
full and the untiring sun, with all the signs that glorify the face
of heaven- the Pleiads, the Hyads, huge Orion, and the Bear, which
men also call the Wain and which turns round ever in one place, facing.
Orion, and alone never dips into the stream of Oceanus. 

He wrought also two cities, fair to see and busy with the hum of men.
In the one were weddings and wedding-feasts, and they were going about
the city with brides whom they were escorting by torchlight from their
chambers. Loud rose the cry of Hymen, and the youths danced to the
music of flute and lyre, while the women stood each at her house door
to see them. 

Meanwhile the people were gathered in assembly, for there was a quarrel,
and two men were wrangling about the blood-money for a man who had
been killed, the one saying before the people that he had paid damages
in full, and the other that he had not been paid. Each was trying
to make his own case good, and the people took sides, each man backing
the side that he had taken; but the heralds kept them back, and the
elders sate on their seats of stone in a solemn circle, holding the
staves which the heralds had put into their hands. Then they rose
and each in his turn gave judgement, and there were two talents laid
down, to be given to him whose judgement should be deemed the fairest.

About the other city there lay encamped two hosts in gleaming armour,
and they were divided whether to sack it, or to spare it and accept
the half of what it contained. But the men of the city would not yet
consent, and armed themselves for a surprise; their wives and little
children kept guard upon the walls, and with them were the men who
were past fighting through age; but the others sallied forth with
Mars and Pallas Minerva at their head- both of them wrought in gold
and clad in golden raiment, great and fair with their armour as befitting
gods, while they that followed were smaller. When they reached the
place where they would lay their ambush, it was on a riverbed to which
live stock of all kinds would come from far and near to water; here,
then, they lay concealed, clad in full armour. Some way off them there
were two scouts who were on the look-out for the coming of sheep or
cattle, which presently came, followed by two shepherds who were playing
on their pipes, and had not so much as a thought of danger. When those
who were in ambush saw this, they cut off the flocks and herds and
killed the shepherds. Meanwhile the besiegers, when they heard much
noise among the cattle as they sat in council, sprang to their horses,
and made with all speed towards them; when they reached them they
set battle in array by the banks of the river, and the hosts aimed
their bronze-shod spears at one another. With them were Strife and
Riot, and fell Fate who was dragging three men after her, one with
a fresh wound, and the other unwounded, while the third was dead,
and she was dragging him along by his heel: and her robe was bedrabbled
in men's blood. They went in and out with one another and fought as
though they were living people haling away one another's dead.

He wrought also a fair fallow field, large and thrice ploughed already.
Many men were working at the plough within it, turning their oxen
to and fro, furrow after furrow. Each time that they turned on reaching
the headland a man would come up to them and give them a cup of wine,
and they would go back to their furrows looking forward to the time
when they should again reach the headland. The part that they had
ploughed was dark behind them, so that the field, though it was of
gold, still looked as if it were being ploughed- very curious to behold.

He wrought also a field of harvest corn, and the reapers were reaping
with sharp sickles in their hands. Swathe after swathe fell to the
ground in a straight line behind them, and the binders bound them
in bands of twisted straw. There were three binders, and behind them
there were boys who gathered the cut corn in armfuls and kept on bringing
them to be bound: among them all the owner of the land stood by in
silence and was glad. The servants were getting a meal ready under
an oak, for they had sacrificed a great ox, and were busy cutting
him up, while the women were making a porridge of much white barley
for the labourers' dinner. 

He wrought also a vineyard, golden and fair to see, and the vines
were loaded with grapes. The bunches overhead were black, but the
vines were trained on poles of silver. He ran a ditch of dark metal
all round it, and fenced it with a fence of tin; there was only one
path to it, and by this the vintagers went when they would gather
the vintage. Youths and maidens all blithe and full of glee, carried
the luscious fruit in plaited baskets; and with them there went a
boy who made sweet music with his lyre, and sang the Linus-song with
his clear boyish voice. 

He wrought also a herd of homed cattle. He made the cows of gold and
tin, and they lowed as they came full speed out of the yards to go
and feed among the waving reeds that grow by the banks of the river.
Along with the cattle there went four shepherds, all of them in gold,
and their nine fleet dogs went with them. Two terrible lions had fastened
on a bellowing bull that was with the foremost cows, and bellow as
he might they haled him, while the dogs and men gave chase: the lions
tore through the bull's thick hide and were gorging on his blood and
bowels, but the herdsmen were afraid to do anything, and only hounded
on their dogs; the dogs dared not fasten on the lions but stood by
barking and keeping out of harm's way. 

The god wrought also a pasture in a fair mountain dell, and large
flock of sheep, with a homestead and huts, and sheltered sheepfolds.

Furthermore he wrought a green, like that which Daedalus once made
in Cnossus for lovely Ariadne. Hereon there danced youths and maidens
whom all would woo, with their hands on one another's wrists. The
maidens wore robes of light linen, and the youths well woven shirts
that were slightly oiled. The girls were crowned with garlands, while
the young men had daggers of gold that hung by silver baldrics; sometimes
they would dance deftly in a ring with merry twinkling feet, as it
were a potter sitting at his work and making trial of his wheel to
see whether it will run, and sometimes they would go all in line with
one another, and much people was gathered joyously about the green.
There was a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre, while two
tumblers went about performing in the midst of them when the man struck
up with his tune. 

All round the outermost rim of the shield he set the mighty stream
of the river Oceanus. 

Then when he had fashioned the shield so great and strong, he made
a breastplate also that shone brighter than fire. He made helmet,
close fitting to the brow, and richly worked, with a golden plume
overhanging it; and he made greaves also of beaten tin. 

Lastly, when the famed lame god had made all the armour, he took it
and set it before the mother of Achilles; whereon she darted like
a falcon from the snowy summits of Olympus and bore away the gleaming
armour from the house of Vulcan. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIX

Now when Dawn in robe of saffron was hasting from the streams of
Oceanus, to bring light to mortals and immortals, Thetis reached the
ships with the armour that the god had given her. She found her son
fallen about the body of Patroclus and weeping bitterly. Many also
of his followers were weeping round him, but when the goddess came
among them she clasped his hand in her own, saying, "My son, grieve
as we may we must let this man lie, for it is by heaven's will that
he has fallen; now, therefore, accept from Vulcan this rich and goodly
armour, which no man has ever yet borne upon his shoulders."

As she spoke she set the armour before Achilles, and it rang out bravely
as she did so. The Myrmidons were struck with awe, and none dared
look full at it, for they were afraid; but Achilles was roused to
still greater fury, and his eyes gleamed with a fierce light, for
he was glad when he handled the splendid present which the god had
made him. Then, as soon as he had satisfied himself with looking at
it, he said to his mother, "Mother, the god has given me armour, meet
handiwork for an immortal and such as no living could have fashioned;
I will now arm, but I much fear that flies will settle upon the son
of Menoetius and breed worms about his wounds, so that his body, now
he is dead, will be disfigured and the flesh will rot." 

Silver-footed Thetis answered, "My son, be not disquieted about this
matter. I will find means to protect him from the swarms of noisome
flies that prey on the bodies of men who have been killed in battle.
He may lie for a whole year, and his flesh shall still be as sound
as ever, or even sounder. Call, therefore, the Achaean heroes in assembly;
unsay your anger against Agamemnon; arm at once, and fight with might
and main." 

As she spoke she put strength and courage into his heart, and she
then dropped ambrosia and red nectar into the wounds of Patroclus,
that his body might suffer no change. 

Then Achilles went out upon the seashore, and with a loud cry called
on the Achaean heroes. On this even those who as yet had stayed always
at the ships, the pilots and helmsmen, and even the stewards who were
about the ships and served out rations, all came to the place of assembly
because Achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so long
from fighting. Two sons of Mars, Ulysses and the son of Tydeus, came
limping, for their wounds still pained them; nevertheless they came,
and took their seats in the front row of the assembly. Last of all
came Agamemnon, king of men, he too wounded, for Coon son of Antenor
had struck him with a spear in battle. 

When the Achaeans were got together Achilles rose and said, "Son of
Atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you and me,
when we two were in such high anger about Briseis, surely it would
have been better, had Diana's arrow slain her at the ships on the
day when I took her after having sacked Lyrnessus. For so, many an
Achaean the less would have bitten dust before the foe in the days
of my anger. It has been well for Hector and the Trojans, but the
Achaeans will long indeed remember our quarrel. Now, however, let
it be, for it is over. If we have been angry, necessity has schooled
our anger. I put it from me: I dare not nurse it for ever; therefore,
bid the Achaeans arm forthwith that I may go out against the Trojans,
and learn whether they will be in a mind to sleep by the ships or
no. Glad, I ween, will he be to rest his knees who may fly my spear
when I wield it." 

Thus did he speak, and the Achaeans rejoiced in that he had put away
his anger. 

Then Agamemnon spoke, rising in his place, and not going into the
middle of the assembly. "Danaan heroes," said he, "servants of Mars,
it is well to listen when a man stands up to speak, and it is not
seemly to interrupt him, or it will go hard even with a practised
speaker. Who can either hear or speak in an uproar? Even the finest
orator will be disconcerted by it. I will expound to the son of Peleus,
and do you other Achaeans heed me and mark me well. Often have the
Achaeans spoken to me of this matter and upbraided me, but it was
not I that did it: Jove, and Fate, and Erinys that walks in darkness
struck me mad when we were assembled on the day that I took from Achilles
the meed that had been awarded to him. What could I do? All things
are in the hand of heaven, and Folly, eldest of Jove's daughters,
shuts men's eyes to their destruction. She walks delicately, not on
the solid earth, but hovers over the heads of men to make them stumble
or to ensnare them. 

"Time was when she fooled Jove himself, who they say is greatest whether
of gods or men; for Juno, woman though she was, beguiled him on the
day when Alcmena was to bring forth mighty Hercules in the fair city
of Thebes. He told it out among the gods saying, 'Hear me all gods
and goddesses, that I may speak even as I am minded; this day shall
an Ilithuia, helper of women who are in labour, bring a man child
into the world who shall be lord over all that dwell about him who
are of my blood and lineage.' Then said Juno all crafty and full of
guile, 'You will play false, and will not hold to your word. Swear
me, O Olympian, swear me a great oath, that he who shall this day
fall between the feet of a woman, shall be lord over all that dwell
about him who are of your blood and lineage.' 

"Thus she spoke, and Jove suspected her not, but swore the great oath,
to his much ruing thereafter. For Juno darted down from the high summit
of Olympus, and went in haste to Achaean Argos where she knew that
the noble wife of Sthenelus son of Perseus then was. She being with
child and in her seventh month, Juno brought the child to birth though
there was a month still wanting, but she stayed the offspring of Alcmena,
and kept back the Ilithuiae. Then she went to tell Jove the son of
Saturn, and said, 'Father Jove, lord of the lightning- I have a word
for your ear. There is a fine child born this day, Eurystheus, son
to Sthenelus the son of Perseus; he is of your lineage; it is well,
therefore, that he should reign over the Argives.' 

"On this Jove was stung to the very quick, and in his rage he caught
Folly by the hair, and swore a great oath that never should she again
invade starry heaven and Olympus, for she was the bane of all. Then
he whirled her round with a twist of his hand, and flung her down
from heaven so that she fell on to the fields of mortal men; and he
was ever angry with her when he saw his son groaning under the cruel
labours that Eurystheus laid upon him. Even so did I grieve when mighty
Hector was killing the Argives at their ships, and all the time I
kept thinking of Folly who had so baned me. I was blind, and Jove
robbed me of my reason; I will now make atonement, and will add much
treasure by way of amends. Go, therefore, into battle, you and your
people with you. I will give you all that Ulysses offered you yesterday
in your tents: or if it so please you, wait, though you would fain
fight at once, and my squires shall bring the gifts from my ship,
that you may see whether what I give you is enough." 

And Achilles answered, "Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, you
can give such gifts as you think proper, or you can withhold them:
it is in your own hands. Let us now set battle in array; it is not
well to tarry talking about trifles, for there is a deed which is
as yet to do. Achilles shall again be seen fighting among the foremost,
and laying low the ranks of the Trojans: bear this in mind each one
of you when he is fighting." 

Then Ulysses said, "Achilles, godlike and brave, send not the Achaeans
thus against Ilius to fight the Trojans fasting, for the battle will
be no brief one, when it is once begun, and heaven has filled both
sides with fury; bid them first take food both bread and wine by the
ships, for in this there is strength and stay. No man can do battle
the livelong day to the going down of the sun if he is without food;
however much he may want to fight his strength will fail him before
he knows it; hunger and thirst will find him out, and his limbs will
grow weary under him. But a man can fight all day if he is full fed
with meat and wine; his heart beats high, and his strength will stay
till he has routed all his foes; therefore, send the people away and
bid them prepare their meal; King Agamemnon will bring out the gifts
in presence of the assembly, that all may see them and you may be
satisfied. Moreover let him swear an oath before the Argives that
he has never gone up into the couch of Briseis, nor been with her
after the manner of men and women; and do you, too, show yourself
of a gracious mind; let Agamemnon entertain you in his tents with
a feast of reconciliation, that so you may have had your dues in full.
As for you, son of Atreus, treat people more righteously in future;
it is no disgrace even to a king that he should make amends if he
was wrong in the first instance." 

And King Agamemnon answered, "Son of Laertes, your words please me
well, for throughout you have spoken wisely. I will swear as you would
have me do; I do so of my own free will, neither shall I take the
name of heaven in vain. Let, then, Achilles wait, though he would
fain fight at once, and do you others wait also, till the gifts come
from my tent and we ratify the oath with sacrifice. Thus, then, do
I charge you: take some noble young Achaeans with you, and bring from
my tents the gifts that I promised yesterday to Achilles, and bring
the women also; furthermore let Talthybius find me a boar from those
that are with the host, and make it ready for sacrifice to Jove and
to the sun." 

Then said Achilles, "Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, see to
these matters at some other season, when there is breathing time and
when I am calmer. Would you have men eat while the bodies of those
whom Hector son of Priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain?
Let the sons of the Achaeans, say I, fight fasting and without food,
till we have avenged them; afterwards at the going down of the sun
let them eat their fill. As for me, Patroclus is lying dead in my
tent, all hacked and hewn, with his feet to the door, and his comrades
are mourning round him. Therefore I can take thought of nothing save
only slaughter and blood and the rattle in the throat of the dying."

Ulysses answered, "Achilles, son of Peleus, mightiest of all the Achaeans,
in battle you are better than I, and that more than a little, but
in counsel I am much before you, for I am older and of greater knowledge.
Therefore be patient under my words. Fighting is a thing of which
men soon surfeit, and when Jove, who is wars steward, weighs the upshot,
it may well prove that the straw which our sickles have reaped is
far heavier than the grain. It may not be that the Achaeans should
mourn the dead with their bellies; day by day men fall thick and threefold
continually; when should we have respite from our sorrow? Let us mourn
our dead for a day and bury them out of sight and mind, but let those
of us who are left eat and drink that we may arm and fight our foes
more fiercely. In that hour let no man hold back, waiting for a second
summons; such summons shall bode ill for him who is found lagging
behind at our ships; let us rather sally as one man and loose the
fury of war upon the Trojans." 

When he had thus spoken he took with him the sons of Nestor, with
Meges son of Phyleus, Thoas, Meriones, Lycomedes son of Creontes,
and Melanippus, and went to the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus. The
word was not sooner said than the deed was done: they brought out
the seven tripods which Agamemnon had promised, with the twenty metal
cauldrons and the twelve horses; they also brought the women skilled
in useful arts, seven in number, with Briseis, which made eight. Ulysses
weighed out the ten talents of gold and then led the way back, while
the young Achaeans brought the rest of the gifts, and laid them in
the middle of the assembly. 

Agamemnon then rose, and Talthybius whose voice was like that of a
god came to him with the boar. The son of Atreus drew the knife which
he wore by the scabbard of his mighty sword, and began by cutting
off some bristles from the boar, lifting up his hands in prayer as
he did so. The other Achaeans sat where they were all silent and orderly
to hear the king, and Agamemnon looked into the vault of heaven and
prayed saying, "I call Jove the first and mightiest of all gods to
witness, I call also Earth and Sun and the Erinyes who dwell below
and take vengeance on him who shall swear falsely, that I have laid
no hand upon the girl Briseis, neither to take her to my bed nor otherwise,
but that she has remained in my tents inviolate. If I swear falsely
may heaven visit me with all the penalties which it metes out to those
who perjure themselves." 

He cut the boar's throat as he spoke, whereon Talthybius whirled it
round his head, and flung it into the wide sea to feed the fishes.
Then Achilles also rose and said to the Argives, "Father Jove, of
a truth you blind men's eyes and bane them. The son of Atreus had
not else stirred me to so fierce an anger, nor so stubbornly taken
Briseis from me against my will. Surely Jove must have counselled
the destruction of many an Argive. Go, now, and take your food that
we may begin fighting." 

On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
ship. The Myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to
the ship of Achilles. They placed them in his tents, while the stable-men
drove the horses in among the others. 

Briseis, fair as Venus, when she saw the mangled body of Patroclus,
flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck,
and her lovely face with both her hands. Beautiful as a goddess she
wept and said, "Patroclus, dearest friend, when I went hence I left
you living; I return, O prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows
multiply upon me one after the other. I saw him to whom my father
and mother married me, cut down before our city, and my three own
dear brothers perished with him on the self-same day; but you, Patroclus,
even when Achilles slew my husband and sacked the city of noble Mynes,
told me that I was not to weep, for you said you would make Achilles
marry me, and take me back with him to Phthia, we should have a wedding
feast among the Myrmidons. You were always kind to me and I shall
never cease to grieve for you." 

She wept as she spoke, and the women joined in her lament-making as
though their tears were for Patroclus, but in truth each was weeping
for her own sorrows. The elders of the Achaeans gathered round Achilles
and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. "I
pray you," said he, "if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat
nor drink, for I am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even
to the going down of the sun." 

On this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of
Atreus and Ulysses, Nestor, Idomeneus, and the knight Phoenix, who
stayed behind and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow:
but he would not be comforted till he should have flung himself into
the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of
Patroclus. Then he said- 

"Hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner
ready for me at once and without delay when the Achaeans were hasting
to fight the Trojans; now, therefore, though I have meat and drink
in my tents, yet will I fast for sorrow. Grief greater than this I
could not know, not even though I were to hear of the death of my
father, who is now in Phthia weeping for the loss of me his son, who
am here fighting the Trojans in a strange land for the accursed sake
of Helen, nor yet though I should hear that my son is no more- he
who is being brought up in Scyros- if indeed Neoptolemus is still
living. Till now I made sure that I alone was to fall here at Troy
away from Argos, while you were to return to Phthia, bring back my
son with you in your own ship, and show him all my property, my bondsmen,
and the greatness of my house- for Peleus must surely be either dead,
or what little life remains to him is oppressed alike with the infirmities
of age and ever present fear lest he should hear the sad tidings of
my death." 

He wept as he spoke, and the elders sighed in concert as each thought
on what he had left at home behind him. The son of Saturn looked down
with pity upon them, and said presently to Minerva, "My child, you
have quite deserted your hero; is he then gone so clean out of your
recollection? There he sits by the ships all desolate for the loss
of his dear comrade, and though the others are gone to their dinner
he will neither eat nor drink. Go then and drop nectar and ambrosia
into his breast, that he may know no hunger." 

With these words he urged Minerva, who was already of the same mind.
She darted down from heaven into the air like some falcon sailing
on his broad wings and screaming. Meanwhile the Achaeans were arming
throughout the host, and when Minerva had dropped nectar and ambrosia
into Achilles so that no cruel hunger should cause his limbs to fail
him, she went back to the house of her mighty father. Thick as the
chill snow-flakes shed from the hand of Jove and borne on the keen
blasts of the north wind, even so thick did the gleaming helmets,
the bossed shields, the strongly plated breastplates, and the ashen
spears stream from the ships. The sheen pierced the sky, the whole
land was radiant with their flashing armour, and the sound of the
tramp of their treading rose from under their feet. In the midst of
them all Achilles put on his armour; he gnashed his teeth, his eyes
gleamed like fire, for his grief was greater than he could bear. Thus,
then, full of fury against the Trojans, did he don the gift of the
god, the armour that Vulcan had made him. 

First he put on the goodly greaves fitted with ancle-clasps, and next
he did on the breastplate about his chest. He slung the silver-studded
sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then took up the shield so
great and strong that shone afar with a splendour as of the moon.
As the light seen by sailors from out at sea, when men have lit a
fire in their homestead high up among the mountains, but the sailors
are carried out to sea by wind and storm far from the haven where
they would be- even so did the gleam of Achilles' wondrous shield
strike up into the heavens. He lifted the redoubtable helmet, and
set it upon his head, from whence it shone like a star, and the golden
plumes which Vulcan had set thick about the ridge of the helmet, waved
all around it. Then Achilles made trial of himself in his armour to
see whether it fitted him, so that his limbs could play freely under
it, and it seemed to buoy him up as though it had been wings.

He also drew his father's spear out of the spear-stand, a spear so
great and heavy and strong that none of the Achaeans save only Achilles
had strength to wield it; this was the spear of Pelian ash from the
topmost ridges of Mt. Pelion, which Chiron had once given to Peleus,
fraught with the death of heroes. Automedon and Alcimus busied themselves
with the harnessing of his horses; they made the bands fast about
them, and put the bit in their mouths, drawing the reins back towards
the chariot. Automedon, whip in hand, sprang up behind the horses,
and after him Achilles mounted in full armour, resplendent as the
sun-god Hyperion. Then with a loud voice he chided with his father's
horses saying, "Xanthus and Balius, famed offspring of Podarge- this
time when we have done fighting be sure and bring your driver safely
back to the host of the Achaeans, and do not leave him dead on the
plain as you did Patroclus." 

Then fleet Xanthus answered under the yoke- for white-armed Juno had
endowed him with human speech- and he bowed his head till his mane
touched the ground as it hung down from under the yoke-band. "Dread
Achilles," said he, "we will indeed save you now, but the day of your
death is near, and the blame will not be ours, for it will be heaven
and stern fate that will destroy you. Neither was it through any sloth
or slackness on our part that the Trojans stripped Patroclus of his
armour; it was the mighty god whom lovely Leto bore that slew him
as he fought among the foremost, and vouchsafed a triumph to Hector.
We two can fly as swiftly as Zephyrus who they say is fleetest of
all winds; nevertheless it is your doom to fall by the hand of a man
and of a god." 

When he had thus said the Erinyes stayed his speech, and Achilles
answered him in great sadness, saying, "Why, O Xanthus, do you thus
foretell my death? You need not do so, for I well know that I am to
fall here, far from my dear father and mother; none the more, however,
shall I stay my hand till I have given the Trojans their fill of fighting."

So saying, with a loud cry he drove his horses to the front.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XX

Thus, then, did the Achaeans arm by their ships round you, O son
of Peleus, who were hungering for battle; while the Trojans over against
them armed upon the rise of the plain. 

Meanwhile Jove from the top of many-delled Olympus, bade Themis gather
the gods in council, whereon she went about and called them to the
house of Jove. There was not a river absent except Oceanus, nor a
single one of the nymphs that haunt fair groves, or springs of rivers
and meadows of green grass. When they reached the house of cloud-compelling
Jove, they took their seats in the arcades of polished marble which
Vulcan with his consummate skill had made for father Jove.

In such wise, therefore, did they gather in the house of Jove. Neptune
also, lord of the earthquake, obeyed the call of the goddess, and
came up out of the sea to join them. There, sitting in the midst of
them, he asked what Jove's purpose might be. "Why," said he, "wielder
of the lightning, have you called the gods in council? Are you considering
some matter that concerns the Trojans and Achaeans- for the blaze
of battle is on the point of being kindled between them?"

And Jove answered, "You know my purpose, shaker of earth, and wherefore
I have called you hither. I take thought for them even in their destruction.
For my own part I shall stay here seated on Mt. Olympus and look on
in peace, but do you others go about among Trojans and Achaeans, and
help either side as you may be severally disposed. If Achilles fights
the Trojans without hindrance they will make no stand against him;
they have ever trembled at the sight of him, and now that he is roused
to such fury about his comrade, he will override fate itself and storm
their city." 

Thus spoke Jove and gave the word for war, whereon the gods took their
several sides and went into battle. Juno, Pallas Minerva, earth-encircling
Neptune, Mercury bringer of good luck and excellent in all cunning-
all these joined the host that came from the ships; with them also
came Vulcan in all his glory, limping, but yet with his thin legs
plying lustily under him. Mars of gleaming helmet joined the Trojans,
and with him Apollo of locks unshorn, and the archer goddess Diana,
Leto, Xanthus, and laughter-loving Venus. 

So long as the gods held themselves aloof from mortal warriors the
Achaeans were triumphant, for Achilles who had long refused to fight
was now with them. There was not a Trojan but his limbs failed him
for fear as he beheld the fleet son of Peleus all glorious in his
armour, and looking like Mars himself. When, however, the Olympians
came to take their part among men, forthwith uprose strong Strife,
rouser of hosts, and Minerva raised her loud voice, now standing by
the deep trench that ran outside the wall, and now shouting with all
her might upon the shore of the sounding sea. Mars also bellowed out
upon the other side, dark as some black thunder-cloud, and called
on the Trojans at the top of his voice, now from the acropolis, and
now speeding up the side of the river Simois till he came to the hill
Callicolone. 

Thus did the gods spur on both hosts to fight, and rouse fierce contention
also among themselves. The sire of gods and men thundered from heaven
above, while from beneath Neptune shook the vast earth, and bade the
high hills tremble. The spurs and crests of many-fountained Ida quaked,
as also the city of the Trojans and the ships of the Achaeans. Hades,
king of the realms below, was struck with fear; he sprang panic-stricken
from his throne and cried aloud in terror lest Neptune, lord of the
earthquake, should crack the ground over his head, and lay bare his
mouldy mansions to the sight of mortals and immortals- mansions so
ghastly grim that even the gods shudder to think of them. Such was
the uproar as the gods came together in battle. Apollo with his arrows
took his stand to face King Neptune, while Minerva took hers against
the god of war; the archer-goddess Diana with her golden arrows, sister
of far-darting Apollo, stood to face Juno; Mercury the lusty bringer
of good luck faced Leto, while the mighty eddying river whom men can
Scamander, but gods Xanthus, matched himself against Vulcan.

The gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. But the heart
of Achilles was set on meeting Hector son of Priam, for it was with
his blood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn
lord of battle. Meanwhile Apollo set Aeneas on to attack the son of
Peleus, and put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of
Lycaon son of Priam. In his likeness therefore, he said to Aeneas,
"Aeneas, counsellor of the Trojans, where are now the brave words
with which you vaunted over your wine before the Trojan princes, saying
that you would fight Achilles son of Peleus in single combat?"

And Aeneas answered, "Why do you thus bid me fight the proud son of
Peleus, when I am in no mind to do so? Were I to face him now, it
would not be for the first time. His spear has already put me to Right
from Ida, when he attacked our cattle and sacked Lyrnessus and Pedasus;
Jove indeed saved me in that he vouchsafed me strength to fly, else
had the fallen by the hands of Achilles and Minerva, who went before
him to protect him and urged him to fall upon the Lelegae and Trojans.
No man may fight Achilles, for one of the gods is always with him
as his guardian angel, and even were it not so, his weapon flies ever
straight, and fails not to pierce the flesh of him who is against
him; if heaven would let me fight him on even terms he should not
soon overcome me, though he boasts that he is made of bronze."

Then said King Apollo, son to Jove, "Nay, hero, pray to the ever-living
gods, for men say that you were born of Jove's daughter Venus, whereas
Achilles is son to a goddess of inferior rank. Venus is child to Jove,
while Thetis is but daughter to the old man of the sea. Bring, therefore,
your spear to bear upon him, and let him not scare you with his taunts
and menaces." 

As he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his people,
and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the foremost fighters.
Nor did the son of Anchises escape the notice of white-armed Juno,
as he went forth into the throng to meet Achilles. She called the
gods about her, and said, "Look to it, you two, Neptune and Minerva,
and consider how this shall be; Phoebus Apollo has been sending Aeneas
clad in full armour to fight Achilles. Shall we turn him back at once,
or shall one of us stand by Achilles and endow him with strength so
that his heart fail not, and he may learn that the chiefs of the immortals
are on his side, while the others who have all along been defending
the Trojans are but vain helpers? Let us all come down from Olympus
and join in the fight, that this day he may take no hurt at the hands
of the Trojans. Hereafter let him suffer whatever fate may have spun
out for him when he was begotten and his mother bore him. If Achilles
be not thus assured by the voice of a god, he may come to fear presently
when one of us meets him in battle, for the gods are terrible if they
are seen face to face." 

Neptune lord of the earthquake answered her saying, "Juno, restrain
your fury; it is not well; I am not in favour of forcing the other
gods to fight us, for the advantage is too greatly on our own side;
let us take our places on some hill out of the beaten track, and let
mortals fight it out among themselves. If Mars or Phoebus Apollo begin
fighting, or keep Achilles in check so that he cannot fight, we too,
will at once raise the cry of battle, and in that case they will soon
leave the field and go back vanquished to Olympus among the other
gods." 

With these words the dark-haired god led the way to the high earth-barrow
of Hercules, built round solid masonry, and made by the Trojans and
Pallas Minerva for him fly to when the sea-monster was chasing him
from the shore on to the plain. Here Neptune and those that were with
him took their seats, wrapped in a thick cloud of darkness; but the
other gods seated themselves on the brow of Callicolone round you,
O Phoebus, and Mars the waster of cities. 

Thus did the gods sit apart and form their plans, but neither side
was willing to begin battle with the other, and Jove from his seat
on high was in command over them all. Meanwhile the whole plain was
alive with men and horses, and blazing with the gleam of armour. The
earth rang again under the tramp of their feet as they rushed towards
each other, and two champions, by far the foremost of them all, met
between the hosts to fight- to wit, Aeneas son of Anchises, and noble
Achilles. 

Aeneas was first to stride forward in attack, his doughty helmet tossing
defiance as he came on. He held his strong shield before his breast,
and brandished his bronze spear. The son of Peleus from the other
side sprang forth to meet him, fike some fierce lion that the whole
country-side has met to hunt and kill- at first he bodes no ill, but
when some daring youth has struck him with a spear, he crouches openmouthed,
his jaws foam, he roars with fury, he lashes his tail from side to
side about his ribs and loins, and glares as he springs straight before
him, to find out whether he is to slay, or be slain among the foremost
of his foes- even with such fury did Achilles burn to spring upon
Aeneas. 

When they were now close up with one another Achilles was first to
speak. "Aeneas," said he, "why do you stand thus out before the host
to fight me? Is it that you hope to reign over the Trojans in the
seat of Priam? Nay, though you kill me Priam will not hand his kingdom
over to you. He is a man of sound judgement, and he has sons of his
own. Or have the Trojans been allotting you a demesne of passing richness,
fair with orchard lawns and corn lands, if you should slay me? This
you shall hardly do. I have discomfited you once already. Have you
forgotten how when you were alone I chased you from your herds helter-skelter
down the slopes of Ida? You did not turn round to look behind you;
you took refuge in Lyrnessus, but I attacked the city, and with the
help of Minerva and father Jove I sacked it and carried its women
into captivity, though Jove and the other gods rescued you. You think
they will protect you now, but they will not do so; therefore I say
go back into the host, and do not face me, or you will rue it. Even
a fool may be wise after the event." 

Then Aeneas answered, "Son of Peleus, think not that your words can
scare me as though I were a child. I too, if I will, can brag and
talk unseemly. We know one another's race and parentage as matters
of common fame, though neither have you ever seen my parents nor I
yours. Men say that you are son to noble Peleus, and that your mother
is Thetis, fair-haired daughter of the sea. I have noble Anchises
for my father, and Venus for my mother; the parents of one or other
of us shall this day mourn a son, for it will be more than silly talk
that shall part us when the fight is over. Learn, then, my lineage
if you will- and it is known to many. 

"In the beginning Dardanus was the son of Jove, and founded Dardania,
for Ilius was not yet stablished on the plain for men to dwell in,
and her people still abode on the spurs of many-fountained Ida. Dardanus
had a son, king Erichthonius, who was wealthiest of all men living;
he had three thousand mares that fed by the water-meadows, they and
their foals with them. Boreas was enamoured of them as they were feeding,
and covered them in the semblance of a dark-maned stallion. Twelve
filly foals did they conceive and bear him, and these, as they sped
over the rich plain, would go bounding on over the ripe ears of corn
and not break them; or again when they would disport themselves on
the broad back of Ocean they could gallop on the crest of a breaker.
Erichthonius begat Tros, king of the Trojans, and Tros had three noble
sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede who was comeliest of mortal men;
wherefore the gods carried him off to be Jove's cupbearer, for his
beauty's sake, that he might dwell among the immortals. Ilus begat
Laomedon, and Laomedon begat Tithonus, Priam, Lampus, Clytius, and
Hiketaon of the stock of Mars. But Assaracus was father to Capys,
and Capys to Anchises, who was my father, while Hector is son to Priam.

"Such do I declare my blood and lineage, but as for valour, Jove gives
it or takes it as he will, for he is lord of all. And now let there
be no more of this prating in mid-battle as though we were children.
We could fling taunts without end at one another; a hundred-oared
galley would not hold them. The tongue can run all whithers and talk
all wise; it can go here and there, and as a man says, so shall he
be gainsaid. What is the use of our bandying hard like women who when
they fall foul of one another go out and wrangle in the streets, one
half true and the other lies, as rage inspires them? No words of yours
shall turn me now that I am fain to fight- therefore let us make trial
of one another with our spears." 

As he spoke he drove his spear at the great and terrible shield of
Achilles, which rang out as the point struck it. The son of Peleus
held the shield before him with his strong hand, and he was afraid,
for he deemed that Aeneas's spear would go through it quite easily,
not reflecting that the god's glorious gifts were little likely to
yield before the blows of mortal men; and indeed Aeneas's spear did
not pierce the shield, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed
the point. It went through two layers, but the god had made the shield
in five, two of bronze, the two innermost ones of tin, and one of
gold; it was in this that the spear was stayed. 

Achilles in his turn threw, and struck the round shield of Aeneas
at the very edge, where the bronze was thinnest; the spear of Pelian
ash went clean through, and the shield rang under the blow; Aeneas
was afraid, and crouched backwards, holding the shield away from him;
the spear, however, flew over his back, and stuck quivering in the
ground, after having gone through both circles of the sheltering shield.
Aeneas though he had avoided the spear, stood still, blinded with
fear and grief because the weapon had gone so near him; then Achilles
sprang furiously upon him, with a cry as of death and with his keen
blade drawn, and Aeneas seized a great stone, so huge that two men,
as men now are, would be unable to lift it, but Aeneas wielded it
quite easily. 

Aeneas would then have struck Achilles as he was springing towards
him, either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered him, and
Achilles would have closed with him and despatched him with his sword,
had not Neptune lord of the earthquake been quick to mark, and said
forthwith to the immortals, "Alas, I am sorry for great Aeneas, who
will now go down to the house of Hades, vanquished by the son of Peleus.
Fool that he was to give ear to the counsel of Apollo. Apollo will
never save him from destruction. Why should this man suffer when he
is guiltless, to no purpose, and in another's quarrel? Has he not
at all times offered acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in
heaven? Let us then snatch him from death's jaws, lest the son of
Saturn be angry should Achilles slay him. It is fated, moreover, that
he should escape, and that the race of Dardanus, whom Jove loved above
all the sons born to him of mortal women, shall not perish utterly
without seed or sign. For now indeed has Jove hated the blood of Priam,
while Aeneas shall reign over the Trojans, he and his children's children
that shall be born hereafter." 

Then answered Juno, "Earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself, and
consider concerning Aeneas, whether you will save him, or suffer him,
brave though he be, to fall by the hand of Achilles son of Peleus.
For of a truth we two, I and Pallas Minerva, have sworn full many
a time before all the immortals, that never would we shield Trojans
from destruction, not even when all Troy is burning in the flames
that the Achaeans shall kindle." 

When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went into the battle amid
the clash of spears, and came to the place where Achilles and Aeneas
were. Forthwith he shed a darkness before the eyes of the son of Peleus,
drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of Aeneas, and
laid it at the feet of Achilles. Then he lifted Aeneas on high from
off the earth and hurried him away. Over the heads of many a band
of warriors both horse and foot did he soar as the god's hand sped
him, till he came to the very fringe of the battle where the Cauconians
were arming themselves for fight. Neptune, shaker of the earth, then
came near to him and said, Aeneas, what god has egged you on to this
folly in fighting the son of Peleus, who is both a mightier man of
valour and more beloved of heaven than you are? Give way before him
whensoever you meet him, lest you go down to the house of Hades even
though fate would have it otherwise. When Achilles is dead you may
then fight among the foremost undaunted, for none other of the Achaeans
shall slay you." 

The god left him when he had given him these instructions, and at
once removed the darkness from before the eyes of Achilles, who opened
them wide indeed and said in great anger, "Alas! what marvel am I
now beholding? Here is my spear upon the ground, but I see not him
whom I meant to kill when I hurled it. Of a truth Aeneas also must
be under heaven's protection, although I had thought his boasting
was idle. Let him go hang; he will be in no mood to fight me further,
seeing how narrowly he has missed being killed. I will now give my
orders to the Danaans and attack some other of the Trojans."

He sprang forward along the line and cheered his men on as he did
so. "Let not the Trojans," he cried, "keep you at arm's length, Achaeans,
but go for them and fight them man for man. However valiant I may
be, I cannot give chase to so many and fight all of them. Even Mars,
who is an immortal, or Minerva, would shrink from flinging himself
into the jaws of such a fight and laying about him; nevertheless,
so far as in me lies I will show no slackness of hand or foot nor
want of endurance, not even for a moment; I will utterly break their
ranks, and woe to the Trojan who shall venture within reach of my
spear." 

Thus did he exhort them. Meanwhile Hector called upon the Trojans
and declared that he would fight Achilles. "Be not afraid, proud Trojans,"
said he, "to face the son of Peleus; I could fight gods myself if
the battle were one of words only, but they would be more than a match
for me, if we had to use our spears. Even so the deed of Achilles
will fall somewhat short of his word; he will do in part, and the
other part he will clip short. I will go up against him though his
hands be as fire- though his hands be fire and his strength iron."

Thus urged the Trojans lifted up their spears against the Achaeans,
and raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves into the midst
of their ranks. But Phoebus Apollo came up to Hector and said, "Hector,
on no account must you challenge Achilles to single combat; keep a
lookout for him while you are under cover of the others and away from
the thick of the fight, otherwise he will either hit you with a spear
or cut you down at close quarters." 

Thus he spoke, and Hector drew back within the crowd, for he was afraid
when he heard what the god had said to him. Achilles then sprang upon
the Trojans with a terrible cry, clothed in valour as with a garment.
First he killed Iphition son of Otrynteus, a leader of much people
whom a naiad nymph had borne to Otrynteus waster of cities, in the
land of Hyde under the snowy heights of Mt. Tmolus. Achilles struck
him full on the head as he was coming on towards him, and split it
clean in two; whereon he fell heavily to the ground and Achilles vaunted
over him saying, "You he low, son of Otrynteus, mighty hero; your
death is here, but your lineage is on the Gygaean lake where your
father's estate lies, by Hyllus, rich in fish, and the eddying waters
of Hermus." 

Thus did he vaunt, but darkness closed the eyes of the other. The
chariots of the Achaeans cut him up as their wheels passed over him
in the front of the battle, and after him Achilles killed Demoleon,
a valiant man of war and son to Antenor. He struck him on the temple
through his bronze-cheeked helmet. The helmet did not stay the spear,
but it went right on, crushing the bone so that the brain inside was
shed in all directions, and his lust of fighting was ended. Then he
struck Hippodamas in the midriff as he was springing down from his
chariot in front of him, and trying to escape. He breathed his last,
bellowing like a bull bellows when young men are dragging him to offer
him in sacrifice to the King of Helice, and the heart of the earth-shaker
is glad; even so did he bellow as he lay dying. Achilles then went
in pursuit of Polydorus son of Priam, whom his father had always forbidden
to fight because he was the youngest of his sons, the one he loved
best, and the fastest runner. He, in his folly and showing off the
fleetness of his feet, was rushing about among front ranks until he
lost his life, for Achilles struck him in the middle of the back as
he was darting past him: he struck him just at the golden fastenings
of his belt and where the two pieces of the double breastplate overlapped.
The point of the spear pierced him through and came out by the navel,
whereon he fell groaning on to his knees and a cloud of darkness overshadowed
him as he sank holding his entrails in his hands. 

When Hector saw his brother Polydorus with his entrails in his hands
and sinking down upon the ground, a mist came over his eyes, and he
could not bear to keep longer at a distance; he therefore poised his
spear and darted towards Achilles like a flame of fire. When Achilles
saw him he bounded forward and vaunted saying, "This is he that has
wounded my heart most deeply and has slain my beloved comrade. Not
for long shall we two quail before one another on the highways of
war." 

He looked fiercely on Hector and said, "Draw near, that you may meet
your doom the sooner." Hector feared him not and answered, "Son of
Peleus, think not that your words can scare me as though I were a
child; I too if I will can brag and talk unseemly; I know that you
are a mighty warrior, mightier by far than I, nevertheless the issue
lies in the the lap of heaven whether I, worse man though I be, may
not slay you with my spear, for this too has been found keen ere now."

He hurled his spear as he spoke, but Minerva breathed upon it, and
though she breathed but very lightly she turned it back from going
towards Achilles, so that it returned to Hector and lay at his feet
in front of him. Achilles then sprang furiously on him with a loud
cry, bent on killing him, but Apollo caught him up easily as a god
can, and hid him in a thick darkness. Thrice did Achilles spring towards
him spear in hand, and thrice did he waste his blow upon the air.
When he rushed forward for the fourth time as though he were a god,
he shouted aloud saying, "Hound, this time too you have escaped death-
but of a truth it came exceedingly near you. Phoebus Apollo, to whom
it seems you pray before you go into battle, has again saved you;
but if I too have any friend among the gods I will surely make an
end of you when I come across you at some other time. Now, however,
I will pursue and overtake other Trojans." 

On this he struck Dryops with his spear, about the middle of his neck,
and he fell headlong at his feet. There he let him lie and stayed
Demouchus son of Philetor, a man both brave and of great stature,
by hitting him on the knee with a spear; then he smote him with his
sword and killed him. After this he sprang on Laogonus and Dardanus,
sons of Bias, and threw them from their chariot, the one with a blow
from a thrown spear, while the other he cut down in hand-to-hand fight.
There was also Tros the son of Alastor- he came up to Achilles and
clasped his knees in the hope that he would spare him and not kill
him but let him go, because they were both of the same age. Fool,
he might have known that he should not prevail with him, for the man
was in no mood for pity or forbearance but was in grim earnest. Therefore
when Tros laid hold of his knees and sought a hearing for his prayers,
Achilles drove his sword into his liver, and the liver came rolling
out, while his bosom was all covered with the black blood that welled
from the wound. Thus did death close his eyes as he lay lifeless.

Achilles then went up to Mulius and struck him on the ear with a spear,
and the bronze spear-head came right out at the other ear. He also
struck Echeclus son of Agenor on the head with his sword, which became
warm with the blood, while death and stern fate closed the eyes of
Echeclus. Next in order the bronze point of his spear wounded Deucalion
in the fore-arm where the sinews of the elbow are united, whereon
he waited Achilles' onset with his arm hanging down and death staring
him in the face. Achilles cut his head off with a blow from his sword
and flung it helmet and all away from him, and the marrow came oozing
out of his backbone as he lay. He then went in pursuit of Rhigmus,
noble son of Peires, who had come from fertile Thrace, and struck
him through the middle with a spear which fixed itself in his belly,
so that he fell headlong from his chariot. He also speared Areithous
squire to Rhigmus in the back as he was turning his horses in flight,
and thrust him from his chariot, while the horses were struck with
panic. 

As a fire raging in some mountain glen after long drought- and the
dense forest is in a blaze, while the wind carries great tongues of
fire in every direction- even so furiously did Achilles rage, wielding
his spear as though he were a god, and giving chase to those whom
he would slay, till the dark earth ran with blood. Or as one who yokes
broad-browed oxen that they may tread barley in a threshing-floor-
and it is soon bruised small under the feet of the lowing cattle-
even so did the horses of Achilles trample on the shields and bodies
of the slain. The axle underneath and the railing that ran round the
car were bespattered with clots of blood thrown up by the horses'
hoofs, and from the tyres of the wheels; but the son of Peleus pressed
on to win still further glory, and his hands were bedrabbled with
gore. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXI

Now when they came to the ford of the full-flowing river Xanthus,
begotten of immortal Jove, Achilles cut their forces in two: one half
he chased over the plain towards the city by the same way that the
Achaeans had taken when flying panic-stricken on the preceding day
with Hector in full triumph; this way did they fly pell-mell, and
Juno sent down a thick mist in front of them to stay them. The other
half were hemmed in by the deep silver-eddying stream, and fell into
it with a great uproar. The waters resounded, and the banks rang again,
as they swam hither and thither with loud cries amid the whirling
eddies. As locusts flying to a river before the blast of a grass fire-
the flame comes on and on till at last it overtakes them and they
huddle into the water- even so was the eddying stream of Xanthus filled
with the uproar of men and horses, all struggling in confusion before
Achilles. 

Forthwith the hero left his spear upon the bank, leaning it against
a tamarisk bush, and plunged into the river like a god, armed with
his sword only. Fell was his purpose as he hewed the Trojans down
on every side. Their dying groans rose hideous as the sword smote
them, and the river ran red with blood. As when fish fly scared before
a huge dolphin, and fill every nook and corner of some fair haven-
for he is sure to eat all he can catch- even so did the Trojans cower
under the banks of the mighty river, and when Achilles' arms grew
weary with killing them, he drew twelve youths alive out of the water,
to sacrifice in revenge for Patroclus son of Menoetius. He drew them
out like dazed fawns, bound their hands behind them with the girdles
of their own shirts, and gave them over to his men to take back to
the ships. Then he sprang into the river, thirsting for still further
blood. 

There he found Lycaon, son of Priam seed of Dardanus, as he was escaping
out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken prisoner when he
was in his father's vineyard, having set upon him by night, as he
was cutting young shoots from a wild fig-tree to make the wicker sides
of a chariot. Achilles then caught him to his sorrow unawares, and
sent him by sea to Lemnos, where the son of Jason bought him. But
a guest-friend, Eetion of Imbros, freed him with a great sum, and
sent him to Arisbe, whence he had escaped and returned to his father's
house. He had spent eleven days happily with his friends after he
had come from Lemnos, but on the twelfth heaven again delivered him
into the hands of Achilles, who was to send him to the house of Hades
sorely against his will. He was unarmed when Achilles caught sight
of him, and had neither helmet nor shield; nor yet had he any spear,
for he had thrown all his armour from him on to the bank, and was
sweating with his struggles to get out of the river, so that his strength
was now failing him. 

Then Achilles said to himself in his surprise, "What marvel do I see
here? If this man can come back alive after having been sold over
into Lemnos, I shall have the Trojans also whom I have slain rising
from the world below. Could not even the waters of the grey sea imprison
him, as they do many another whether he will or no? This time let
him taste my spear, that I may know for certain whether mother earth
who can keep even a strong man down, will be able to hold him, or
whether thence too he will return." 

Thus did he pause and ponder. But Lycaon came up to him dazed and
trying hard to embrace his knees, for he would fain live, not die.
Achilles thrust at him with his spear, meaning to kill him, but Lycaon
ran crouching up to him and caught his knees, whereby the spear passed
over his back, and stuck in the ground, hungering though it was for
blood. With one hand he caught Achilles' knees as he besought him,
and with the other he clutched the spear and would not let it go.
Then he said, "Achilles, have mercy upon me and spare me, for I am
your suppliant. It was in your tents that I first broke bread on the
day when you took me prisoner in the vineyard; after which you sold
away to Lemnos far from my father and my friends, and I brought you
the price of a hundred oxen. I have paid three times as much to gain
my freedom; it is but twelve days that I have come to Ilius after
much suffering, and now cruel fate has again thrown me into your hands.
Surely father Jove must hate me, that he has given me over to you
a second time. Short of life indeed did my mother Laothoe bear me,
daughter of aged Altes- of Altes who reigns over the warlike Lelegae
and holds steep Pedasus on the river Satnioeis. Priam married his
daughter along with many other women and two sons were born of her,
both of whom you will have slain. Your spear slew noble Polydorus
as he was fighting in the front ranks, and now evil will here befall
me, for I fear that I shall not escape you since heaven has delivered
me over to you. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart,
spare me, for I am not of the same womb as Hector who slew your brave
and noble comrade." 

With such words did the princely son of Priam beseech Achilles; but
Achilles answered him sternly. "Idiot," said he, "talk not to me of
ransom. Until Patroclus fell I preferred to give the Trojans quarter,
and sold beyond the sea many of those whom I had taken alive; but
now not a man shall live of those whom heaven delivers into my hands
before the city of Ilius- and of all Trojans it shall fare hardest
with the sons of Priam. Therefore, my friend, you too shall die. Why
should you whine in this way? Patroclus fell, and he was a better
man than you are. I too- see you not how I am great and goodly? I
am son to a noble father, and have a goddess for my mother, but the
hands of doom and death overshadow me all as surely. The day will
come, either at dawn or dark, or at the noontide, when one shall take
my life also in battle, either with his spear, or with an arrow sped
from his bow." 

Thus did he speak, and Lycaon's heart sank within him. He loosed his
hold of the spear, and held out both hands before him; but Achilles
drew his keen blade, and struck him by the collar-bone on his neck;
he plunged his two-edged sword into him to the very hilt, whereon
he lay at full length on the ground, with the dark blood welling from
him till the earth was soaked. Then Achilles caught him by the foot
and flung him into the river to go down stream, vaunting over him
the while, and saying, "Lie there among the fishes, who will lick
the blood from your wound and gloat over it; your mother shall not
lay you on any bier to mourn you, but the eddies of Scamander shall
bear you into the broad bosom of the sea. There shall the fishes feed
on the fat of Lycaon as they dart under the dark ripple of the waters-
so perish all of you till we reach the citadel of strong Ilius- you
in flight, and I following after to destroy you. The river with its
broad silver stream shall serve you in no stead, for all the bulls
you offered him and all the horses that you flung living into his
waters. None the less miserably shall you perish till there is not
a man of you but has paid in full for the death of Patroclus and the
havoc you wrought among the Achaeans whom you have slain while I held
aloof from battle." 

So spoke Achilles, but the river grew more and more angry, and pondered
within himself how he should stay the hand of Achilles and save the
Trojans from disaster. Meanwhile the son of Peleus, spear in hand,
sprang upon Asteropaeus son of Pelegon to kill him. He was son to
the broad river Axius and Periboea eldest daughter of Acessamenus;
for the river had lain with her. Asteropaeus stood up out of the water
to face him with a spear in either hand, and Xanthus filled him with
courage, being angry for the death of the youths whom Achilles was
slaying ruthlessly within his waters. When they were close up with
one another Achilles was first to speak. "Who and whence are you,"
said he, "who dare to face me? Woe to the parents whose son stands
up against me." And the son of Pelegon answered, "Great son of Peleus,
why should you ask my lineage. I am from the fertile land of far Paeonia,
captain of the Paeonians, and it is now eleven days that I am at Ilius.
I am of the blood of the river Axius- of Axius that is the fairest
of all rivers that run. He begot the famed warrior Pelegon, whose
son men call me. Let us now fight, Achilles." 

Thus did he defy him, and Achilles raised his spear of Pelian ash.
Asteropaeus failed with both his spears, for he could use both hands
alike; with the one spear he struck Achilles' shield, but did not
pierce it, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the point;
with the other spear he grazed the elbow of Achilles! right arm drawing
dark blood, but the spear itself went by him and fixed itself in the
ground, foiled of its bloody banquet. Then Achilles, fain to kill
him, hurled his spear at Asteropaeus, but failed to hit him and struck
the steep bank of the river, driving the spear half its length into
the earth. The son of Peleus then drew his sword and sprang furiously
upon him. Asteropaeus vainly tried to draw Achilles' spear out of
the bank by main force; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his
might to draw it out, and thrice he had to leave off trying; the fourth
time he tried to bend and break it, but ere he could do so Achilles
smote him with his sword and killed him. He struck him in the belly
near the navel, so that all his bowels came gushing out on to the
ground, and the darkness of death came over him as he lay gasping.
Then Achilles set his foot on his chest and spoiled him of his armour,
vaunting over him and saying, "Lie there- begotten of a river though
you be, it is hard for you to strive with the offspring of Saturn's
son. You declare yourself sprung from the blood of a broad river,
but I am of the seed of mighty Jove. My father is Peleus, son of Aeacus
ruler over the many Myrmidons, and Aeacus was the son of Jove. Therefore
as Jove is mightier than any river that flows into the sea, so are
his children stronger than those of any river whatsoever. Moreover
you have a great river hard by if he can be of any use to you, but
there is no fighting against Jove the son of Saturn, with whom not
even King Achelous can compare, nor the mighty stream of deep-flowing
Oceanus, from whom all rivers and seas with all springs and deep wells
proceed; even Oceanus fears the lightnings of great Jove, and his
thunder that comes crashing out of heaven." 

With this he drew his bronze spear out of the bank, and now that he
had killed Asteropaeus, he let him lie where he was on the sand, with
the dark water flowing over him and the eels and fishes busy nibbling
and gnawing the fat that was about his kidneys. Then he went in chase
of the Paeonians, who were flying along the bank of the river in panic
when they saw their leader slain by the hands of the son of Peleus.
Therein he slew Thersilochus, Mydon, Astypylus, Mnesus, Thrasius,
Oeneus, and Ophelestes, and he would have slain yet others, had not
the river in anger taken human form, and spoken to him from out the
deep waters saying, "Achilles, if you excel all in strength, so do
you also in wickedness, for the gods are ever with you to protect
you: if, then, the son of Saturn has vouchsafed it to you to destroy
all the Trojans, at any rate drive them out of my stream, and do your
grim work on land. My fair waters are now filled with corpses, nor
can I find any channel by which I may pour myself into the sea for
I am choked with dead, and yet you go on mercilessly slaying. I am
in despair, therefore, O captain of your host, trouble me no further."

Achilles answered, "So be it, Scamander, Jove-descended; but I will
never cease dealing out death among the Trojans, till I have pent
them up in their city, and made trial of Hector face to face, that
I may learn whether he is to vanquish me, or I him." 

As he spoke he set upon the Trojans with a fury like that of the gods.
But the river said to Apollo, "Surely, son of Jove, lord of the silver
bow, you are not obeying the commands of Jove who charged you straitly
that you should stand by the Trojans and defend them, till twilight
fades, and darkness is over an the earth." 

Meanwhile Achilles sprang from the bank into mid-stream, whereon the
river raised a high wave and attacked him. He swelled his stream into
a torrent, and swept away the many dead whom Achilles had slain and
left within his waters. These he cast out on to the land, bellowing
like a bull the while, but the living he saved alive, hiding them
in his mighty eddies. The great and terrible wave gathered about Achilles,
falling upon him and beating on his shield, so that he could not keep
his feet; he caught hold of a great elm-tree, but it came up by the
roots, and tore away the bank, damming the stream with its thick branches
and bridging it all across; whereby Achilles struggled out of the
stream, and fled full speed over the plain, for he was afraid.

But the mighty god ceased not in his pursuit, and sprang upon him
with a dark-crested wave, to stay his hands and save the Trojans from
destruction. The son of Peleus darted away a spear's throw from him;
swift as the swoop of a black hunter-eagle which is the strongest
and fleetest of all birds, even so did he spring forward, and the
armour rang loudly about his breast. He fled on in front, but the
river with a loud roar came tearing after. As one who would water
his garden leads a stream from some fountain over his plants, and
all his ground-spade in hand he clears away the dams to free the channels,
and the little stones run rolling round and round with the water as
it goes merrily down the bank faster than the man can follow- even
so did the river keep catching up with Achilles albeit he was a fleet
runner, for the gods are stronger than men. As often as he would strive
to stand his ground, and see whether or no all the gods in heaven
were in league against him, so often would the mighty wave come beating
down upon his shoulders, and be would have to keep flying on and on
in great dismay; for the angry flood was tiring him out as it flowed
past him and ate the ground from under his feet. 

Then the son of Peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying, "Father
Jove, is there none of the gods who will take pity upon me, and save
me from the river? I do not care what may happen to me afterwards.
I blame none of the other dwellers on Olympus so severely as I do
my dear mother, who has beguiled and tricked me. She told me I was
to fall under the walls of Troy by the flying arrows of Apollo; would
that Hector, the best man among the Trojans, might there slay me;
then should I fall a hero by the hand of a hero; whereas now it seems
that I shall come to a most pitiable end, trapped in this river as
though I were some swineherd's boy, who gets carried down a torrent
while trying to cross it during a storm." 

As soon as he had spoken thus, Neptune and Minerva came up to him
in the likeness of two men, and took him by the hand to reassure him.
Neptune spoke first. "Son of Peleus," said he, "be not so exceeding
fearful; we are two gods, come with Jove's sanction to assist you,
I, and Pallas Minerva. It is not your fate to perish in this river;
he will abate presently as you will see; moreover we strongly advise
you, if you will be guided by us, not to stay your hand from fighting
till you have pent the Trojan host within the famed walls of Ilius-
as many of them as may escape. Then kill Hector and go back to the
ships, for we will vouchsafe you a triumph over him." 

When they had so said they went back to the other immortals, but Achilles
strove onward over the plain, encouraged by the charge the gods had
laid upon him. All was now covered with the flood of waters, and much
goodly armour of the youths that had been slain was rifting about,
as also many corpses, but he forced his way against the stream, speeding
right onwards, nor could the broad waters stay him, for Minerva had
endowed him with great strength. Nevertheless Scamander did not slacken
in his pursuit, but was still more furious with the son of Peleus.
He lifted his waters into a high crest and cried aloud to Simois saying,
"Dear brother, let the two of us unite to save this man, or he will
sack the mighty city of King Priam, and the Trojans will not hold
out against him. Help me at once; fill your streams with water from
their sources, rouse all your torrents to a fury; raise your wave
on high, and let snags and stones come thundering down you that we
may make an end of this savage creature who is now lording it as though
he were a god. Nothing shall serve him longer, not strength nor comeliness,
nor his fine armour, which forsooth shall soon be lying low in the
deep waters covered over with mud. I will wrap him in sand, and pour
tons of shingle round him, so that the Achaeans shall not know how
to gather his bones for the silt in which I shall have hidden him,
and when they celebrate his funeral they need build no barrow."

On this he upraised his tumultuous flood high against Achilles, seething
as it was with foam and blood and the bo&ies of the dead. The dark
waters of the river stood upright and would have overwhelmed the son
of Peleus, but Juno, trembling lest Achilles should be swept away
in the mighty torrent, lifted her voice on high and called out to
Vulcan her son. "Crook-foot," she cried, "my child, be up and doing,
for I deem it is with you that Xanthus is fain to fight; help us at
once, kindle a fierce fire; I will then bring up the west and the
white south wind in a mighty hurricane from the sea, that shall bear
the flames against the heads and armour of the Trojans and consume
them, while you go along the banks of Xanthus burning his trees and
wrapping him round with fire. Let him not turn you back neither by
fair words nor foul, and slacken not till I shout and tell you. Then
you may stay your flames." 

On this Vulcan kindled a fierce fire, which broke out first upon the
plain and burned the many dead whom Achilles had killed and whose
bodies were lying about in great numbers; by this means the plain
was dried and the flood stayed. As the north wind, blowing on an orchard
that has been sodden with autumn rain, soon dries it, and the heart
of the owner is glad- even so the whole plan was dried and the dead
bodies were consumed. Then he turned tongues of fire on to the river.
He burned the elms the willows and the tamarisks, the lotus also,
with the rushes and marshy herbage that grew abundantly by the banks
of the river. The eels and fishes that go darting about everywhere
in the water, these, too, were sorely harassed by the flames that
cunning Vulcan had kindled, and the river himself was scalded, so
that he spoke saying, "Vulcan, there is no god can hold his own against
you. I cannot fight you when you flare out your flames in this way;
strive with me no longer. Let Achilles drive the Trojans out of city
immediately. What have I to do with quarrelling and helping people?"

He was boiling as he spoke, and all his waters were seething. As a
cauldron upon 'a large fire boils when it is melting the lard of some
fatted hog, and the lard keeps bubbling up all over when the dry faggots
blaze under it- even so were the goodly waters of Xanthus heated with
the fire till they were boiling. He could flow no longer but stayed
his stream, so afflicted was he by the blasts of fire which cunning
Vulcan had raised. Then he prayed to Juno and besought her saying,
"Juno, why should your son vex my stream with such especial fury?
I am not so much to blame as all the others are who have been helping
the Trojans. I will leave off, since you so desire it, and let son
leave off also. Furthermore I swear never again will I do anything
to save the Trojans from destruction, not even when all Troy is burning
in the flames which the Achaeans will kindle." 

As soon as Juno heard this she said to her son Vulcan, "Son Vulcan,
hold now your flames; we ought not to use such violence against a
god for the sake of mortals." 

When she had thus spoken Vulcan quenched his flames, and the river
went back once more into his own fair bed. 

Xanthus was now beaten, so these two left off fighting, for Juno stayed
them though she was still angry; but a furious quarrel broke out among
the other gods, for they were of divided counsels. They fell on one
another with a mighty uproar- earth groaned, and the spacious firmament
rang out as with a blare of trumpets. Jove heard as he was sitting
on Olympus, and laughed for joy when he saw the gods coming to blows
among themselves. They were not long about beginning, and Mars piercer
of shields opened the battle. Sword in hand he sprang at once upon
Minerva and reviled her. "Why, vixen," said he, "have you again set
the gods by the ears in the pride and haughtiness of your heart? Have
you forgotten how you set Diomed son of Tydeus on to wound me, and
yourself took visible spear and drove it into me to the hurt of my
fair body? You shall now suffer for what you then did to me."

As he spoke he struck her on the terrible tasselled aegis- so terrible
that not even can Jove's lightning pierce it. Here did murderous Mars
strike her with his great spear. She drew back and with her strong
hand seized a stone that was lying on the plain- great and rugged
and black- which men of old had set for the boundary of a field. With
this she struck Mars on the neck, and brought him down. Nine roods
did he cover in his fall, and his hair was all soiled in the dust,
while his armour rang rattling round him. But Minerva laughed and
vaunted over him saying, "Idiot, have you not learned how far stronger
I am than you, but you must still match yourself against me? Thus
do your mother's curses now roost upon you, for she is angry and would
do you mischief because you have deserted the Achaeans and are helping
the Trojans." 

She then turned her two piercing eyes elsewhere, whereon Jove's daughter
Venus took Mars by the hand and led him away groaning all the time,
for it was only with great difficulty that he had come to himself
again. When Queen Juno saw her, she said to Minerva, "Look, daughter
of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, that vixen Venus is again taking
Mars through the crowd out of the battle; go after her at once."

Thus she spoke. Minerva sped after Venus with a will, and made at
her, striking her on the bosom with her strong hand so that she fell
fainting to the ground, and there they both lay stretched at full
length. Then Minerva vaunted over her saying, "May all who help the
Trojans against the Argives prove just as redoubtable and stalwart
as Venus did when she came across me while she was helping Mars. Had
this been so, we should long since have ended the war by sacking the
strong city of Ilius." 

Juno smiled as she listened. Meanwhile King Neptune turned to Apollo
saying, "Phoebus, why should we keep each other at arm's length? it
is not well, now that the others have begun fighting; it will be disgraceful
to us if we return to Jove's bronze-floored mansion on Olympus without
having fought each other; therefore come on, you are the younger of
the two, and I ought not to attack you, for I am older and have had
more experience. Idiot, you have no sense, and forget how we two alone
of all the gods fared hardly round about Ilius when we came from Jove's
house and worked for Laomedon a whole year at a stated wage and he
gave us his orders. I built the Trojans the wall about their city,
so wide and fair that it might be impregnable, while you, Phoebus,
herded cattle for him in the dales of many valleyed Ida. When, however,
the glad hours brought round the time of payment, mighty Laomedon
robbed us of all our hire and sent us off with nothing but abuse.
He threatened to bind us hand and foot and sell us over into some
distant island. He tried, moreover, to cut off the ears of both of
us, so we went away in a rage, furious about the payment he had promised
us, and yet withheld; in spite of all this, you are now showing favour
to his people, and will not join us in compassing the utter ruin of
the proud Trojans with their wives and children." 

And King Apollo answered, "Lord of the earthquake, you would have
no respect for me if I were to fight you about a pack of miserable
mortals, who come out like leaves in summer and eat the fruit of the
field, and presently fall lifeless to the ground. Let us stay this
fighting at once and let them settle it among themselves."

He turned away as he spoke, for he would lay no hand on the brother
of his own father. But his sister the huntress Diana, patroness of
wild beasts, was very angry with him and said, "So you would fly,
Far-Darter, and hand victory over to Neptune with a cheap vaunt to
boot. Baby, why keep your bow thus idle? Never let me again hear you
bragging in my father's house, as you have often done in the presence
of the immortals, that you would stand up and fight with Neptune."

Apollo made her no answer, but Jove's august queen was angry and upbraided
her bitterly. "Bold vixen," she cried, "how dare you cross me thus?
For all your bow you will find it hard to hold your own against me.
Jove made you as a lion among women, and lets you kill them whenever
you choose. You will And it better to chase wild beasts and deer upon
the mountains than to fight those who are stronger than you are. If
you would try war, do so, and find out by pitting yourself against
me, how far stronger I am than you are." 

She caught both Diana's wrists with her left hand as she spoke, and
with her right she took the bow from her shoulders, and laughed as
she beat her with it about the ears while Diana wriggled and writhed
under her blows. Her swift arrows were shed upon the ground, and she
fled weeping from under Juno's hand as a dove that flies before a
falcon to the cleft of some hollow rock, when it is her good fortune
to escape. Even so did she fly weeping away, leaving her bow and arrows
behind her. 

Then the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, said to Leto, "Leto,
I shall not fight you; it is ill to come to blows with any of Jove's
wives. Therefore boast as you will among the immortals that you worsted
me in fair fight." 

Leto then gathered up Diana's bow and arrows that had fallen about
amid the whirling dust, and when she had got them she made all haste
after her daughter. Diana had now reached Jove's bronze-floored mansion
on Olympus, and sat herself down with many tears on the knees of her
father, while her ambrosial raiment was quivering all about her. The
son of Saturn drew her towards him, and laughing pleasantly the while
began to question her saying, "Which of the heavenly beings, my dear
child, has been treating you in this cruel manner, as though you had
been misconducting yourself in the face of everybody?" and the fair-crowned
goddess of the chase answered, "It was your wife Juno, father, who
has been beating me; it is always her doing when there is any quarrelling
among the immortals." 

Thus did they converse, and meanwhile Phoebus Apollo entered the strong
city of Ilius, for he was uneasy lest the wall should not hold out
and the Danaans should take the city then and there, before its hour
had come; but the rest of the ever-living gods went back, some angry
and some triumphant to Olympus, where they took their seats beside
Jove lord of the storm cloud, while Achilles still kept on dealing
out death alike on the Trojans and on their As when the smoke from
some burning city ascends to heaven when the anger of the gods has
kindled it- there is then toil for all, and sorrow for not a few-
even so did Achilles bring toil and sorrow on the Trojans.

Old King Priam stood on a high tower of the wall looking down on huge
Achilles as the Trojans fled panic-stricken before him, and there
was none to help them. Presently he came down from off the tower and
with many a groan went along the wall to give orders to the brave
warders of the gate. "Keep the gates," said he, "wide open till the
people come flying into the city, for Achilles is hard by and is driving
them in rout before him. I see we are in great peril. As soon as our
people are inside and in safety, close the strong gates for I fear
lest that terrible man should come bounding inside along with the
others." 

As he spoke they drew back the bolts and opened the gates, and when
these were opened there was a haven of refuge for the Trojans. Apollo
then came full speed out of the city to meet them and protect them.
Right for the city and the high wall, parched with thirst and grimy
with dust, still they fied on, with Achilles wielding his spear furiously
behind them. For he was as one possessed, and was thirsting after
glory. 

Then had the sons of the Achaeans taken the lofty gates of Troy if
Apollo had not spurred on Agenor, valiant and noble son to Antenor.
He put courage into his heart, and stood by his side to guard him,
leaning against a beech tree and shrouded in thick darkness. When
Agenor saw Achilles he stood still and his heart was clouded with
care. "Alas," said he to himself in his dismay, "if I fly before mighty
Achilles, and go where all the others are being driven in rout, he
will none the less catch me and kill me for a coward. How would it
be were I to let Achilles drive the others before him, and then fly
from the wall to the plain that is behind Ilius till I reach the spurs
of Ida and can hide in the underwood that is thereon? I could then
wash the sweat from off me in the river and in the evening return
to Ilius. But why commune with myself in this way? Like enough he
would see me as I am hurrying from the city over the plain, and would
speed after me till he had caught me- I should stand no chance against
him, for he is mightiest of all mankind. What, then, if I go out and
meet him in front of the city? His flesh too, I take it, can be pierced
by pointed bronze. Life is the same in one and all, and men say that
he is but mortal despite the triumph that Jove son of Saturn vouchsafes
him." 

So saying he stood on his guard and awaited Achilles, for he was now
fain to fight him. As a leopardess that bounds from out a thick covert
to attack a hunter- she knows no fear and is not dismayed by the baying
of the hounds; even though the man be too quick for her and wound
her either with thrust or spear, still, though the spear has pierced
her she will not give in till she has either caught him in her grip
or been killed outright- even so did noble Agenor son of Antenor refuse
to fly till he had made trial of Achilles, and took aim at him with
his spear, holding his round shield before him and crying with a loud
voice. "Of a truth," said he, "noble Achilles, you deem that you shall
this day sack the city of the proud Trojans. Fool, there will be trouble
enough yet before it, for there is many a brave man of us still inside
who will stand in front of our dear parents with our wives and children,
to defend Ilius. Here therefore, huge and mighty warrior though you
be, here shall you cue. 

As he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the spear
struck Achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of newly wrought
tin rang loudly, but the spear recoiled from the body of him whom
it had struck, and did not pierce it, for the gods gift stayed it.
Achilles in his turn attacked noble Agenor, but Apollo would not vouchsafe
him glory, for he snatched Agenor away and hid him in a thick mist,
sending him out of the battle unmolested Then he craftily drew the
son of Peleus away from going after the host, for he put on the semblance
of Agenor and stood in front of Achilles, who ran towards him to give
him chase and pursued him over the corn lands of the plain, turning
him towards the deep waters of the river Scamander. Apollo ran but
a little way before him and beguiled Achilles by making him think
all the time that he was on the point of overtaking him. Meanwhile
the rabble of routed Trojans was thankful to crowd within the city
till their numbers thronged it; no longer did they dare wait for one
another outside the city walls, to learn who had escaped and who were
fallen in fight, but all whose feet and knees could still carry them
poured pell-mell into the town. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXII

Thus the Trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat
from off them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against the
goodly battlements, while the Achaeans with their shields laid upon
their shoulders drew close up to the walls. But stern fate bade Hector
stay where he was before Ilius and the Scaean gates. Then Phoebus
Apollo spoke to the son of Peleus saying, "Why, son of Peleus, do
you, who are but man, give chase to me who am immortal? Have you not
yet found out that it is a god whom you pursue so furiously? You did
not harass the Trojans whom you had routed, and now they are within
their walls, while you have been decoyed hither away from them. Me
you cannot kill, for death can take no hold upon me." 

Achilles was greatly angered and said, "You have baulked me, Far-Darter,
most malicious of all gods, and have drawn me away from the wall,
where many another man would have bitten the dust ere he got within
Ilius; you have robbed me of great glory and have saved the Trojans
at no risk to yourself, for you have nothing to fear, but I would
indeed have my revenge if it were in my power to do so."

On this, with fell intent he made towards the city, and as the winning
horse in a chariot race strains every nerve when he is flying over
the plain, even so fast and furiously did the limbs of Achilles bear
him onwards. King Priam was first to note him as he scoured the plain,
all radiant as the star which men call Orion's Hound, and whose beams
blaze forth in time of harvest more brilliantly than those of any
other that shines by night; brightest of them all though he be, he
yet bodes ill for mortals, for he brings fire and fever in his train-
even so did Achilles' armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards.
Priam raised a cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them
up and shouted out to his dear son, imploring him to return; but Hector
still stayed before the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle
with Achilles. The old man reached out his arms towards him and bade
him for pity's sake come within the walls. "Hector," he cried, "my
son, stay not to face this man alone and unsupported, or you will
meet death at the hands of the son of Peleus, for he is mightier than
you. Monster that he is; would indeed that the gods loved him no better
than I do, for so, dogs and vultures would soon devour him as he lay
stretched on earth, and a load of grief would be lifted from my heart,
for many a brave son has he reft from me, either by killing them or
selling them away in the islands that are beyond the sea: even now
I miss two sons from among the Trojans who have thronged within the
city, Lycaon and Polydorus, whom Laothoe peeress among women bore
me. Should they be still alive and in the hands of the Achaeans, we
will ransom them with gold and bronze, of which we have store, for
the old man Altes endowed his daughter richly; but if they are already
dead and in the house of Hades, sorrow will it be to us two who were
their parents; albeit the grief of others will be more short-lived
unless you too perish at the hands of Achilles. Come, then, my son,
within the city, to be the guardian of Trojan men and Trojan women,
or you will both lose your own life and afford a mighty triumph to
the son of Peleus. Have pity also on your unhappy father while life
yet remains to him- on me, whom the son of Saturn will destroy by
a terrible doom on the threshold of old age, after I have seen my
sons slain and my daughters haled away as captives, my bridal chambers
pillaged, little children dashed to earth amid the rage of battle,
and my sons' wives dragged away by the cruel hands of the Achaeans;
in the end fierce hounds will tear me in pieces at my own gates after
some one has beaten the life out of my body with sword or spear-hounds
that I myself reared and fed at my own table to guard my gates, but
who will yet lap my blood and then lie all distraught at my doors.
When a young man falls by the sword in battle, he may lie where he
is and there is nothing unseemly; let what will be seen, all is honourable
in death, but when an old man is slain there is nothing in this world
more pitiable than that dogs should defile his grey hair and beard
and all that men hide for shame." 

The old man tore his grey hair as he spoke, but he moved not the heart
of Hector. His mother hard by wept and moaned aloud as she bared her
bosom and pointed to the breast which had suckled him. "Hector," she
cried, weeping bitterly the while, "Hector, my son, spurn not this
breast, but have pity upon me too: if I have ever given you comfort
from my own bosom, think on it now, dear son, and come within the
wall to protect us from this man; stand not without to meet him. Should
the wretch kill you, neither I nor your richly dowered wife shall
ever weep, dear offshoot of myself, over the bed on which you lie,
for dogs will devour you at the ships of the Achaeans." 

Thus did the two with many tears implore their son, but they moved
not the heart of Hector, and he stood his ground awaiting huge Achilles
as he drew nearer towards him. As serpent in its den upon the mountains,
full fed with deadly poisons, waits for the approach of man- he is
filled with fury and his eyes glare terribly as he goes writhing round
his den- even so Hector leaned his shield against a tower that jutted
out from the wall and stood where he was, undaunted. 

"Alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, "if I go
within the gates, Polydamas will be the first to heap reproach upon
me, for it was he that urged me to lead the Trojans back to the city
on that awful night when Achilles again came forth against us. I would
not listen, but it would have been indeed better if I had done so.
Now that my folly has destroyed the host, I dare not look Trojan men
and Trojan women in the face, lest a worse man should say, 'Hector
has ruined us by his self-confidence.' Surely it would be better for
me to return after having fought Achilles and slain him, or to die
gloriously here before the city. What, again, if were to lay down
my shield and helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight
up to noble Achilles? What if I were to promise to give up Helen,
who was the fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure that
Alexandrus brought with him in his ships to Troy, aye, and to let
the Achaeans divide the half of everything that the city contains
among themselves? I might make the Trojans, by the mouths of their
princes, take a solemn oath that they would hide nothing, but would
divide into two shares all that is within the city- but why argue
with myself in this way? Were I to go up to him he would show me no
kind of mercy; he would kill me then and there as easily as though
I were a woman, when I had off my armour. There is no parleying with
him from some rock or oak tree as young men and maidens prattle with
one another. Better fight him at once, and learn to which of us Jove
will vouchsafe victory." 

Thus did he stand and ponder, but Achilles came up to him as it were
Mars himself, plumed lord of battle. From his right shoulder he brandished
his terrible spear of Pelian ash, and the bronze gleamed around him
like flashing fire or the rays of the rising sun. Fear fell upon Hector
as he beheld him, and he dared not stay longer where he was but fled
in dismay from before the gates, while Achilles darted after him at
his utmost speed. As a mountain falcon, swiftest of all birds, swoops
down upon some cowering dove- the dove flies before him but the falcon
with a shrill scream follows close after, resolved to have her- even
so did Achilles make straight for Hector with all his might, while
Hector fled under the Trojan wall as fast as his limbs could take
him. 

On they flew along the waggon-road that ran hard by under the wall,
past the lookout station, and past the weather-beaten wild fig-tree,
till they came to two fair springs which feed the river Scamander.
One of these two springs is warm, and steam rises from it as smoke
from a burning fire, but the other even in summer is as cold as hail
or snow, or the ice that forms on water. Here, hard by the springs,
are the goodly washing-troughs of stone, where in the time of peace
before the coming of the Achaeans the wives and fair daughters of
the Trojans used to wash their clothes. Past these did they fly, the
one in front and the other giving ha. behind him: good was the man
that fled, but better far was he that followed after, and swiftly
indeed did they run, for the prize was no mere beast for sacrifice
or bullock's hide, as it might be for a common foot-race, but they
ran for the life of Hector. As horses in a chariot race speed round
the turning-posts when they are running for some great prize- a tripod
or woman- at the games in honour of some dead hero, so did these two
run full speed three times round the city of Priam. All the gods watched
them, and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.

"Alas," said he, "my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued
round the walls of Troy; my heart is full of pity for Hector, who
has burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my honour, at one while
on the of many-valleyed Ida, and again on the citadel of Troy; and
now I see noble Achilles in full pursuit of him round the city of
Priam. What say you? Consider among yourselves and decide whether
we shall now save him or let him fall, valiant though he be, before
Achilles, son of Peleus." 

Then Minerva said, "Father, wielder of the lightning, lord of cloud
and storm, what mean you? Would you pluck this mortal whose doom has
long been decreed out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we
others shall not be of a mind with you." 

And Jove answered, "My child, Trito-born, take heart. I did not speak
in full earnest, and I will let you have your way. Do without let
or hindrance as you are minded." 

Thus did he urge Minerva who was already eager, and down she darted
from the topmost summits of Olympus. 

Achilles was still in full pursuit of Hector, as a hound chasing a
fawn which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and hunts
through glade and thicket. The fawn may try to elude him by crouching
under cover of a bush, but he will scent her out and follow her up
until he gets her- even so there was no escape for Hector from the
fleet son of Peleus. Whenever he made a set to get near the Dardanian
gates and under the walls, that his people might help him by showering
down weapons from above, Achilles would gain on him and head him back
towards the plain, keeping himself always on the city side. As a man
in a dream who fails to lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing-
the one cannot escape nor the other overtake- even so neither could
Achilles come up with Hector, nor Hector break away from Achilles;
nevertheless he might even yet have escaped death had not the time
come when Apollo, who thus far had sustained his strength and nerved
his running, was now no longer to stay by him. Achilles made signs
to the Achaean host, and shook his head to show that no man was to
aim a dart at Hector, lest another might win the glory of having hit
him and he might himself come in second. Then, at last, as they were
nearing the fountains for the fourth time, the father of all balanced
his golden scales and placed a doom in each of them, one for Achilles
and the other for Hector. As he held the scales by the middle, the
doom of Hector fell down deep into the house of Hades- and then Phoebus
Apollo left him. Thereon Minerva went close up to the son of Peleus
and said, "Noble Achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely
take back to the ships a triumph for the Achaeans by slaying Hector,
for all his lust of battle. Do what Apollo may as he lies grovelling
before his father, aegis-bearing Jove, Hector cannot escape us longer.
Stay here and take breath, while I go up to him and persuade him to
make a stand and fight you." 

Thus spoke Minerva. Achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still, leaning
on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while Minerva left him and went
after Hector in the form and with the voice of Deiphobus. She came
close up to him and said, "Dear brother, I see you are hard pressed
by Achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of Priam,
let us await his onset and stand on our defence." 

And Hector answered, "Deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me
of all my brothers, children of Hecuba and Priam, but henceforth I
shall rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside
the wall for my sake when all the others remain inside."

Then Minerva said, "Dear brother, my father and mother went down on
their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside,
so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but I was in an agony of
grief when I beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and
fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we
may learn whether Achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to
the ships, or whether he shall fall before you." 

Thus did Minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were
now close to one another great Hector was first to speak. "I will-no
longer fly you, son of Peleus," said he, "as I have been doing hitherto.
Three times have I fled round the mighty city of Priam, without daring
to withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for I am
in the mind to face you. Let us, then, give pledges to one another
by our gods, who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants;
let it be agreed between us that if Jove vouchsafes me the longer
stay and I take your life, I am not to treat your dead body in any
unseemly fashion, but when I have stripped you of your armour, I am
to give up your body to the Achaeans. And do you likewise."

Achilles glared at him and answered, "Fool, prate not to me about
covenants. There can be no covenants between men and lions, wolves
and lambs can never be of one mind, but hate each other out and out
an through. Therefore there can be no understanding between you and
me, nor may there be any covenants between us, till one or other shall
fall and glut grim Mars with his life's blood. Put forth all your
strength; you have need now to prove yourself indeed a bold soldier
and man of war. You have no more chance, and Pallas Minerva will forthwith
vanquish you by my spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief
you have caused me on account of my comrades whom you have killed
in battle." 

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. Hector saw it coming
and avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it flew over
his head and stuck in the ground beyond; Minerva then snatched it
up and gave it back to Achilles without Hector's seeing her; Hector
thereon said to the son of Peleus, "You have missed your aim, Achilles,
peer of the gods, and Jove has not yet revealed to you the hour of
my doom, though you made sure that he had done so. You were a false-tongued
liar when you deemed that I should forget my valour and quail before
you. You shall not drive spear into the back of a runaway- drive it,
should heaven so grant you power, drive it into me as I make straight
towards you; and now for your own part avoid my spear if you can-
would that you might receive the whole of it into your body; if you
were once dead the Trojans would find the war an easier matter, for
it is you who have harmed them most." 

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. His aim was true for
he hit the middle of Achilles' shield, but the spear rebounded from
it, and did not pierce it. Hector was angry when he saw that the weapon
had sped from his hand in vain, and stood there in dismay for he had
no second spear. With a loud cry he called Diphobus and asked him
for one, but there was no man; then he saw the truth and said to himself,
"Alas! the gods have lured me on to my destruction. I deemed that
the hero Deiphobus was by my side, but he is within the wall, and
Minerva has inveigled me; death is now indeed exceedingly near at
hand and there is no way out of it- for so Jove and his son Apollo
the far-darter have willed it, though heretofore they have been ever
ready to protect me. My doom has come upon me; let me not then die
ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me first do some great
thing that shall be told among men hereafter." 

As he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong by
his side, and gathering himself together be sprang on Achilles like
a soaring eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some lamb
or timid hare- even so did Hector brandish his sword and spring upon
Achilles. Achilles mad with rage darted towards him, with his wondrous
shield before his breast, and his gleaming helmet, made with four
layers of metal, nodding fiercely forward. The thick tresses of gold
wi which Vulcan had crested the helmet floated round it, and as the
evening star that shines brighter than all others through the stillness
of night, even such was the gleam of the spear which Achilles poised
in his right hand, fraught with the death of noble Hector. He eyed
his fair flesh over and over to see where he could best wound it,
but all was protected by the goodly armour of which Hector had spoiled
Patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat where the collar-bones
divide the neck from the shoulders, and this is a most deadly place:
here then did Achilles strike him as he was coming on towards him,
and the point of his spear went right through the fleshy part of the
neck, but it did not sever his windpipe so that he could still speak.
Hector fell headlong, and Achilles vaunted over him saying, "Hector,
you deemed that you should come off scatheless when you were spoiling
Patroclus, and recked not of myself who was not with him. Fool that
you were: for I, his comrade, mightier far than he, was still left
behind him at the ships, and now I have laid you low. The Achaeans
shall give him all due funeral rites, while dogs and vultures shall
work their will upon yourself." 

Then Hector said, as the life ebbed out of him, "I pray you by your
life and knees, and by your parents, let not dogs devour me at the
ships of the Achaeans, but accept the rich treasure of gold and bronze
which my father and mother will offer you, and send my body home,
that the Trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when
I am dead." 

Achilles glared at him and answered, "Dog, talk not to me neither
of knees nor parents; would that I could be as sure of being able
to cut your flesh into pieces and eat it raw, for the ill have done
me, as I am that nothing shall save you from the dogs- it shall not
be, though they bring ten or twenty-fold ransom and weigh it out for
me on the spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. Though Priam son
of Dardanus should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so
your mother shall never lay you out and make lament over the son she
bore, but dogs and vultures shall eat you utterly up." 

Hector with his dying breath then said, "I know you what you are,
and was sure that I should not move you, for your heart is hard as
iron; look to it that I bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day
when Paris and Phoebus Apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you
at the Scaean gates." 

When he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his
soul went out of him and flew down to the house of Hades, lamenting
its sad fate that it should en' youth and strength no longer. But
Achilles said, speaking to the dead body, "Die; for my part I will
accept my fate whensoever Jove and the other gods see fit to send
it." 

As he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side;
then he stripped the blood-stained armour from Hector's shoulders
while the other Achaeans came running up to view his wondrous strength
and beauty; and no one came near him without giving him a fresh wound.
Then would one turn to his neighbour and say, "It is easier to handle
Hector now than when he was flinging fire on to our ships" and as
he spoke he would thrust his spear into him anew. 

When Achilles had done spoiling Hector of his armour, he stood among
the Argives and said, "My friends, princes and counsellors of the
Argives, now that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome this man, who
has done us more hurt than all the others together, consider whether
we should not attack the city in force, and discover in what mind
the Trojans may be. We should thus learn whether they will desert
their city now that Hector has fallen, or will still hold out even
though he is no longer living. But why argue with myself in this way,
while Patroclus is still lying at the ships unburied, and unmourned-
he Whom I can never forget so long as I am alive and my strength fails
not? Though men forget their dead when once they are within the house
of Hades, yet not even there will I forget the comrade whom I have
lost. Now, therefore, Achaean youths, let us raise the song of victory
and go back to the ships taking this man along with us; for we have
achieved a mighty triumph and have slain noble Hector to whom the
Trojans prayed throughout their city as though he were a god."

On this he treated the body of Hector with contumely: he pierced the
sinews at the back of both his feet from heel to ancle and passed
thongs of ox-hide through the slits he had made: thus he made the
body fast to his chariot, letting the head trail upon the ground.
Then when he had put the goodly armour on the chariot and had himself
mounted, he lashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loth.
The dust rose from Hector as he was being dragged along, his dark
hair flew all abroad, and his head once so comely was laid low on
earth, for Jove had now delivered him into the hands of his foes to
do him outrage in his own land. 

Thus was the head of Hector being dishonoured in the dust. His mother
tore her hair, and flung her veil from her with a loud cry as she
looked upon her son. His father made piteous moan, and throughout
the city the people fell to weeping and wailing. It was as though
the whole of frowning Ilius was being smirched with fire. Hardly could
the people hold Priam back in his hot haste to rush without the gates
of the city. He grovelled in the mire and besought them, calling each
one of them by his name. "Let be, my friends," he cried, "and for
all your sorrow, suffer me to go single-handed to the ships of the
Achaeans. Let me beseech this cruel and terrible man, if maybe he
will respect the feeling of his fellow-men, and have compassion on
my old age. His own father is even such another as myself- Peleus,
who bred him and reared him to- be the bane of us Trojans, and of
myself more than of all others. Many a son of mine has he slain in
the flower of his youth, and yet, grieve for these as I may, I do
so for one- Hector- more than for them all, and the bitterness of
my sorrow will bring me down to the house of Hades. Would that he
had died in my arms, for so both his ill-starred mother who bore him,
and myself, should have had the comfort of weeping and mourning over
him." 

Thus did he speak with many tears, and all the people of the city
joined in his lament. Hecuba then raised the cry of wailing among
the Trojans. "Alas, my son," she cried, "what have I left to live
for now that you are no more? Night and day did I glory in. you throughout
the city, for you were a tower of strength to all in Troy, and both
men and women alike hailed you as a god. So long as you lived you
were their pride, but now death and destruction have fallen upon you."

Hector's wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to tell
her that her husband had remained without the gates. She was at her
loom in an inner part of the house, weaving a double purple web, and
embroidering it with many flowers. She told her maids to set a large
tripod on the fire, so as to have a warm bath ready for Hector when
he came out of battle; poor woman, she knew not that he was now beyond
the reach of baths, and that Minerva had laid him low by the hands
of Achilles. She heard the cry coming as from the wall, and trembled
in every limb; the shuttle fell from her hands, and again she spoke
to her waiting-women. "Two of you," she said, "come with me that I
may learn what it is that has befallen; I heard the voice of my husband's
honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it would come into my
mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great misfortune for Priam's
children must be at hand. May I never live to hear it, but I greatly
fear that Achilles has cut off the retreat of brave Hector and has
chased him on to the plain where he was singlehanded; I fear he may
have put an end to the reckless daring which possessed my husband,
who would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on
far in front, foremost of them all in valour." 

Her heart beat fast, and as she spoke she flew from the house like
a maniac, with her waiting-women following after. When she reached
the battlements and the crowd of people, she stood looking out upon
the wall, and saw Hector being borne away in front of the city- the
horses dragging him without heed or care over the ground towards the
ships of the Achaeans. Her eyes were then shrouded as with the darkness
of night and she fell fainting backwards. She tore the tiring from
her head and flung it from her, the frontlet and net with its plaited
band, and the veil which golden Venus had given her on the day when
Hector took her with him from the house of Eetion, after having given
countless gifts of wooing for her sake. Her husband's sisters and
the wives of his brothers crowded round her and supported her, for
she was fain to die in her distraction; when she again presently breathed
and came to herself, she sobbed and made lament among the Trojans
saying, 'Woe is me, O Hector; woe, indeed, that to share a common
lot we were born, you at Troy in the house of Priam, and I at Thebes
under the wooded mountain of Placus in the house of Eetion who brought
me up when I was a child- ill-starred sire of an ill-starred daughter-
would that he had never begotten me. You are now going into the house
of Hades under the secret places of the earth, and you leave me a
sorrowing widow in your house. The child, of whom you and I are the
unhappy parents, is as yet a mere infant. Now that you are gone, O
Hector, you can do nothing for him nor he for you. Even though he
escape the horrors of this woful war with the Achaeans, yet shall
his life henceforth be one of labour and sorrow, for others will seize
his lands. The day that robs a child of his parents severs him from
his own kind; his head is bowed, his cheeks are wet with tears, and
he will go about destitute among the friends of his father, plucking
one by the cloak and another by the shirt. Some one or other of these
may so far pity him as to hold the cup for a moment towards him and
let him moisten his lips, but he must not drink enough to wet the
roof of his mouth; then one whose parents are alive will drive him
from the table with blows and angry words. 'Out with you,' he will
say, 'you have no father here,' and the child will go crying back
to his widowed mother- he, Astyanax, who erewhile would sit upon his
father's knees, and have none but the daintiest and choicest morsels
set before him. When he had played till he was tired and went to sleep,
he would lie in a bed, in the arms of his nurse, on a soft couch,
knowing neither want nor care, whereas now that he has lost his father
his lot will be full of hardship- he, whom the Trojans name Astyanax,
because you, O Hector, were the only defence of their gates and battlements.
The wriggling writhing worms will now eat you at the ships, far from
your parents, when the dogs have glutted themselves upon you. You
will lie naked, although in your house you have fine and goodly raiment
made by hands of women. This will I now burn; it is of no use to you,
for you can never again wear it, and thus you will have respect shown
you by the Trojans both men and women." 

In such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women joined
in her lament. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXIII

Thus did they make their moan throughout the city, while the Achaeans
when they reached the Hellespont went back every man to his own ship.
But Achilles would not let the Myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave
comrades saying, "Myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends,
not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw
near to the body and mourn Patroclus, in due honour to the dead. When
we have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses
and take supper all of us here." 

On this they all joined in a cry of wailing and Achilles led them
in their lament. Thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing
round the body, and Thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning.
The sands of the seashore and the men's armour were wet with their
weeping, so great a minister of fear was he whom they had lost. Chief
in all their mourning was the son of Peleus: he laid his bloodstained
hand on the breast of his friend. "Fare well," he cried, "Patroclus,
even in the house of Hades. I will now do all that I erewhile promised
you; I will drag Hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve
noble sons of Trojans will I also slay before your pyre to avenge
you." 

As he spoke he treated the body of noble Hector with contumely, laying
it at full length in the dust beside the bier of Patroclus. The others
then put off every man his armour, took the horses from their chariots,
and seated themselves in great multitude by the ship of the fleet
descendant of Aeacus, who thereon feasted them with an abundant funeral
banquet. Many a goodly ox, with many a sheep and bleating goat did
they butcher and cut up; many a tusked boar moreover, fat and well-fed,
did they singe and set to roast in the flames of Vulcan; and rivulets
of blood flowed all round the place where the body was lying.

Then the princes of the Achaeans took the son of Peleus to Agamemnon,
but hardly could they persuade him to come with them, so wroth was
he for the death of his comrade. As soon as they reached Agamemnon's
tent they told the serving-men to set a large tripod over the fire
in case they might persuade the son of Peleus 'to wash the clotted
gore from this body, but he denied them sternly, and swore it with
a solemn oath, saying, "Nay, by King Jove, first and mightiest of
all gods, it is not meet that water should touch my body, till I have
laid Patroclus on the flames, have built him a barrow, and shaved
my head- for so long as I live no such second sorrow shall ever draw
nigh me. Now, therefore, let us do all that this sad festival demands,
but at break of day, King Agamemnon, bid your men bring wood, and
provide all else that the dead may duly take into the realm of darkness;
the fire shall thus burn him out of our sight the sooner, and the
people shall turn again to their own labours." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They made haste
to prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full share so
that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had had enough to eat
and drink, the others went to their rest each in his own tent, but
the son of Peleus lay grieving among his Myrmidons by the shore of
the sounding sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in
one after another. Here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and
eased the burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing
Hector round windy Ilius. Presently the sad spirit of Patroclus drew
near him, like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of
his beaming eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. The spirit
hovered over his head and said- 

"You sleep, Achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living,
but now that I am dead you think for me no further. Bury me with all
speed that I may pass the gates of Hades; the ghosts, vain shadows
of men that can labour no more, drive me away from them; they will
not yet suffer me to join those that are beyond the river, and I wander
all desolate by the wide gates of the house of Hades. Give me now
your hand I pray you, for when you have once given me my dues of fire,
never shall I again come forth out of the house of Hades. Nevermore
shall we sit apart and take sweet counsel among the living; the cruel
fate which was my birth-right has yawned its wide jaws around me-
nay, you too Achilles, peer of gods, are doomed to die beneath the
wall of the noble Trojans. 

"One prayer more will I make you, if you will grant it; let not my
bones be laid apart from yours, Achilles, but with them; even as we
were brought up together in your own home, what time Menoetius brought
me to you as a child from Opoeis because by a sad spite I had killed
the son of Amphidamas- not of set purpose, but in childish quarrel
over the dice. The knight Peleus took me into his house, entreated
me kindly, and named me to be your squire; therefore let our bones
lie in but a single urn, the two-handled golden vase given to you
by your mother." 

And Achilles answered, "Why, true heart, are you come hither to lay
these charges upon me? will of my own self do all as you have bidden
me. Draw closer to me, let us once more throw our arms around one
another, and find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows."

He opened his arms towards him as he spoke and would have clasped
him in them, but there was nothing, and the spirit vanished as a vapour,
gibbering and whining into the earth. Achilles sprang to his feet,
smote his two hands, and made lamentation saying, "Of a truth even
in the house of Hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life
in them; all night long the sad spirit of Patroclus has hovered over
head making piteous moan, telling me what I am to do for him, and
looking wondrously like himself." 

Thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning
about the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. Then King
Agamemnon sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to bring
wood, and Meriones, squire to Idomeneus, was in charge over them.
They went out with woodmen's axes and strong ropes in their hands,
and before them went the mules. Up hill and down dale did they go,
by straight ways and crooked, and when they reached the heights of
many-fountained Ida, they laid their axes to the roots of many a tall
branching oak that came thundering down as they felled it. They split
the trees and bound them behind the mules, which then wended their
way as they best could through the thick brushwood on to the plain.
All who had been cutting wood bore logs, for so Meriones squire to
Idomeneus had bidden them, and they threw them down in a line upon
the seashore at the place where Achilles would make a mighty monument
for Patroclus and for himself. 

When they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole
ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but Achilles ordered
his brave Myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man
his horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted
each his chariot- they and their charioteers with them. The chariots
went before, and they that were on foot followed as a cloud in their
tens of thousands after. In the midst of them his comrades bore Patroclus
and covered him with the locks of their hair which they cut off and
threw upon his body. Last came Achilles with his head bowed for sorrow,
so noble a comrade was he taking to the house of Hades. 

When they came to the place of which Achilles had told them they laid
the body down and built up the wood. Achilles then bethought him of
another matter. He went a space away from the pyre, and cut off the
yellow lock which he had let grow for the river Spercheius. He looked
all sorrowfully out upon the dark sea, and said, "Spercheius, in vain
did my father Peleus vow to you that when I returned home to my loved
native land I should cut off this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb;
fifty she-goats was I to sacrifice to you there at your springs, where
is your grove and your altar fragrant with burnt-offerings. Thus did
my father vow, but you have not fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore,
that I shall see my home no more, I give this lock as a keepsake to
the hero Patroclus." 

As he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and
all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. The sun
would have gone down upon their mourning had not Achilles presently
said to Agamemnon, "Son of Atreus, for it is to you that the people
will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from mourning;
bid the people now leave the pyre and set about getting their dinners:
we, to whom the dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted here,
and let the other princes also stay by me." 

When King Agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their ships,
but those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built a pyre
a hundred feet this way and that; then they laid the dead all sorrowfully
upon the top of it. They flayed and dressed many fat sheep and oxen
before the pyre, and Achilles took fat from all of them and wrapped
the body therein from head to foot, heaping the flayed carcases all
round it. Against the bier he leaned two-handled jars of honey and
unguents; four proud horses did he then cast upon the pyre, groaning
the while he did so. The dead hero had had house-dogs; two of them
did Achilles slay and threw upon the pyre; he also put twelve brave
sons of noble Trojans to the sword and laid them with the rest, for
he was full of bitterness and fury. Then he committed all to the resistless
and devouring might of the fire; he groaned aloud and callid on his
dead comrade by name. "Fare well," he cried, "Patroclus, even in the
house of Hades; I am now doing all that I have promised you. Twelve
brave sons of noble Trojans shall the flames consume along with yourself,
but dogs, not fire, shall devour the flesh of Hector son of Priam."

Thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of Hector,
for Jove's daughter Venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed
him with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when
Achilles was dragging him about. Phoebus Apollo moreover sent a dark
cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where
Hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.

Now the pyre about dead Patroclus would not kindle. Achilles therefore
bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two
winds Boreas and Zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. He made them
many drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come
and help him that the wood might make haste to kindle and the dead
bodies be consumed. Fleet Iris heard him praying and started off to
fetch the winds. They were holding high feast in the house of boisterous
Zephyrus when Iris came running up to the stone threshold of the house
and stood there, but as soon as they set eyes on her they all came
towards her and each of them called her to him, but Iris would not
sit down. "I cannot stay," she said, "I must go back to the streams
of Oceanus and the land of the Ethiopians who are offering hecatombs
to the immortals, and I would have my share; but Achilles prays that
Boreas and shrill Zephyrus will come to him, and he vows them goodly
offerings; he would have you blow upon the pyre of Patroclus for whom
all the Achaeans are lamenting." 

With this she left them, and the two winds rose with a cry that rent
the air and swept the clouds before them. They blew on and on until
they came to the sea, and the waves rose high beneath them, but when
they reached Troy they fell upon the pyre till the mighty flames roared
under the blast that they blew. All night long did they blow hard
and beat upon the fire, and all night long did Achilles grasp his
double cup, drawing wine from a mixing-bowl of gold, and calling upon
the spirit of dead Patroclus as he poured it upon the ground until
the earth was drenched. As a father mourns when he is burning the
bones of his bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his
parents, even so did Achilles mourn while burning the body of his
comrade, pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation.

At length as the Morning Star was beginning to herald the light which
saffron-mantled Dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames
fell and the fire began to die. The winds then went home beyond the
Thracian sea, which roared and boiled as they swept over it. The son
of Peleus now turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with
toil, till he fell into a sweet slumber. Presently they who were about
the son of Atreus drew near in a body, and roused him with the noise
and tramp of their coming. He sat upright and said, "Son of Atreus,
and all other princes of the Achaeans, first pour red wine everywhere
upon the fire and quench it; let us then gather the bones of Patroclus
son of Menoetius, singling them out with care; they are easily found,
for they lie in the middle of the pyre, while all else, both men and
horses, has been thrown in a heap and burned at the outer edge. We
will lay the bones in a golden urn, in two layers of fat, against
the time when I shall myself go down into the house of Hades. As for
the barrow, labour not to raise a great one now, but such as is reasonable.
Afterwards, let those Achaeans who may be left at the ships when I
am gone, build it both broad and high." 

Thus he spoke and they obeyed the word of the son of Peleus. First
they poured red wine upon the thick layer of ashes and quenched the
fire. With many tears they singled out the whitened bones of their
loved comrade and laid them within a golden urn in two layers of fat:
they then covered the urn with a linen cloth and took it inside the
tent. They marked off the circle where the barrow should be, made
a foundation for it about the pyre, and forthwith heaped up the earth.
When they had thus raised a mound they were going away, but Achilles
stayed the people and made them sit in assembly. He brought prizes
from the ships-cauldrons, tripods, horses and mules, noble oxen, women
with fair girdles, and swart iron. 

The first prize he offered was for the chariot races- a woman skilled
in all useful arts, and a three-legged cauldron that had ears for
handles, and would hold twenty-two measures. This was for the man
who came in first. For the second there was a six-year old mare, unbroken,
and in foal to a he-ass; the third was to have a goodly cauldron that
had never yet been on the fire; it was still bright as when it left
the maker, and would hold four measures. The fourth prize was two
talents of gold, and the fifth a two-handled urn as yet unsoiled by
smoke. Then he stood up and spoke among the Argives saying-

"Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, these are the prizes that
lie waiting the winners of the chariot races. At any other time I
should carry off the first prize and take it to my own tent; you know
how far my steeds excel all others- for they are immortal; Neptune
gave them to my father Peleus, who in his turn gave them to myself;
but I shall hold aloof, I and my steeds that have lost their brave
and kind driver, who many a time has washed them in clear water and
anointed their manes with oil. See how they stand weeping here, with
their manes trailing on the ground in the extremity of their sorrow.
But do you others set yourselves in order throughout the host, whosoever
has confidence in his horses and in the strength of his chariot."

Thus spoke the son of Peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred
themselves. First among them all uprose Eumelus, king of men, son
of Admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. Next to him rose mighty
Diomed son of Tydeus; he yoked the Trojan horses which he had taken
from Aeneas, when Apollo bore him out of the fight. Next to him, yellow-haired
Menelaus son of Atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses, Agamemnon's
mare Aethe, and his own horse Podargus. The mare had been given to
Agamemnon by echepolus son of Anchises, that he might not have to
follow him to Ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for
Jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious Sicyon.
This mare, all eager for the race, did Menelaus put under the yoke.

Fourth in order Antilochus, son to noble Nestor son of Neleus, made
ready his horses. These were bred in Pylos, and his father came up
to him to give him good advice of which, however, he stood in but
little need. "Antilochus," said Nestor, "you are young, but Jove and
Neptune have loved you well, and have made you an excellent horseman.
I need not therefore say much by way of instruction. You are skilful
at wheeling your horses round the post, but the horses themselves
are very slow, and it is this that will, I fear, mar your chances.
The other drivers know less than you do, but their horses are fleeter;
therefore, my dear son, see if you cannot hit upon some artifice whereby
you may insure that the prize shall not slip through your fingers.
The woodman does more by skill than by brute force; by skill the pilot
guides his storm-tossed barque over the sea, and so by skill one driver
can beat another. If a man go wide in rounding this way and that,
whereas a man who knows what he is doing may have worse horses, but
he will keep them well in hand when he sees the doubling-post; he
knows the precise moment at which to pull the rein, and keeps his
eye well on the man in front of him. I will give you this certain
token which cannot escape your notice. There is a stump of a dead
tree-oak or pine as it may be- some six feet above the ground, and
not yet rotted away by rain; it stands at the fork of the road; it
has two white stones set one on each side, and there is a clear course
all round it. It may have been a monument to some one long since dead,
or it may have been used as a doubling-post in days gone by; now,
however, it has been fixed on by Achilles as the mark round which
the chariots shall turn; hug it as close as you can, but as you stand
in your chariot lean over a little to the left; urge on your right-hand
horse with voice and lash, and give him a loose rein, but let the
left-hand horse keep so close in, that the nave of your wheel shall
almost graze the post; but mind the stone, or you will wound your
horses and break your chariot in pieces, which would be sport for
others but confusion for yourself. Therefore, my dear son, mind well
what you are about, for if you can be first to round the post there
is no chance of any one giving you the goby later, not even though
you had Adrestus's horse Arion behind you horse which is of divine
race- or those of Laomedon, which are the noblest in this country."

When Nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in
his place, and fifth in order Meriones got ready his horses. They
then all mounted their chariots and cast lots.- Achilles shook the
helmet, and the lot of Antilochus son of Nestor fell out first; next
came that of King Eumelus, and after his, those of Menelaus son of
Atreus and of Meriones. The last place fell to the lot of Diomed son
of Tydeus, who was the best man of them all. They took their places
in line; Achilles showed them the doubling-post round which they were
to turn, some way off upon the plain; here he stationed his father's
follower Phoenix as umpire, to note the running, and report truly.

At the same instant they all of them lashed their horses, struck them
with the reins, and shouted at them with all their might. They flew
full speed over the plain away from the ships, the dust rose from
under them as it were a cloud or whirlwind, and their manes were all
flying in the wind. At one moment the chariots seemed to touch the
ground, and then again they bounded into the air; the drivers stood
erect, and their hearts beat fast and furious in their lust of victory.
Each kept calling on his horses, and the horses scoured the plain
amid the clouds of dust that they raised. 

It was when they were doing the last part of the course on their way
back towards the sea that their pace was strained to the utmost and
it was seen what each could do. The horses of the descendant of Pheres
now took the lead, and close behind them came the Trojan stallions
of Diomed. They seemed as if about to mount Eumelus's chariot, and
he could feel their warm breath on his back and on his broad shoulders,
for their heads were close to him as they flew over the course. Diomed
would have now passed him, or there would have been a dead heat, but
Phoebus Apollo to spite him made him drop his whip. Tears of anger
fell from his eyes as he saw the mares going on faster than ever,
while his own horses lost ground through his having no whip. Minerva
saw the trick which Apollo had played the son of Tydeus, so she brought
him his whip and put spirit into his horses; moreover she went after
the son of Admetus in a rage and broke his yoke for him; the mares
went one to one side the course, and the other to the other, and the
pole was broken against the ground. Eumelus was thrown from his chariot
close to the wheel; his elbows, mouth, and nostrils were all torn,
and his forehead was bruised above his eyebrows; his eyes filled with
tears and he could find no utterance. But the son of Tydeus turned
his horses aside and shot far ahead, for Minerva put fresh strength
into them and covered Diomed himself with glory. 

Menelaus son of Atreus came next behind him, but Antilochus called
to his father's horses. "On with you both," he cried, "and do your
very utmost. I do not bid you try to beat the steeds of the son of
Tydeus, for Minerva has put running into them, and has covered Diomed
with glory; but you must overtake the horses of the son of Atreus
and not be left behind, or Aethe who is so fleet will taunt you. Why,
my good fellows, are you lagging? I tell you, and it shall surely
be- Nestor will keep neither of you, but will put both of you to the
sword, if we win any the worse a prize through your carelessness,
fly after them at your utmost speed; I will hit on a plan for passing
them in a narrow part of the way, and it shall not fail me."

They feared the rebuke of their master, and for a short space went
quicker. Presently Antilochus saw a narrow place where the road had
sunk. The ground was broken, for the winter's rain had gathered and
had worn the road so that the whole place was deepened. Menelaus was
making towards it so as to get there first, for fear of a foul, but
Antilochus turned his horses out of the way, and followed him a little
on one side. The son of Atreus was afraid and shouted out, "Antilochus,
you are driving recklessly; rein in your horses; the road is too narrow
here, it will be wider soon, and you can pass me then; if you foul
my chariot you may bring both of us to a mischief." 

But Antilochus plied his whip, and drove faster, as though he had
not heard him. They went side by side for about as far as a young
man can hurl a disc from his shoulder when he is trying his strength,
and then Menelaus's mares drew behind, for he left off driving for
fear the horses should foul one another and upset the chariots; thus,
while pressing on in quest of victory, they might both come headlong
to the ground. Menelaus then upbraided Antilochus and said, "There
is no greater trickster living than you are; go, and bad luck go with
you; the Achaeans say not well that you have understanding, and come
what may you shall not bear away the prize without sworn protest on
my part." 

Then he called on his horses and said to them, "Keep your pace, and
slacken not; the limbs of the other horses will weary sooner than
yours, for they are neither of them young." 

The horses feared the rebuke of their master, and went faster, so
that they were soon nearly up with the others. 

Meanwhile the Achaeans from their seats were watching how the horses
went, as they scoured the plain amid clouds of their own dust. Idomeneus
captain of the Cretans was first to make out the running, for he was
not in the thick of the crowd, but stood on the most commanding part
of the ground. The driver was a long way off, but Idomeneus could
hear him shouting, and could see the foremost horse quite plainly-
a chestnut with a round white star, like the moon, on its forehead.
He stood up and said among the Argives, "My friends, princes and counsellors
of the Argives, can you see the running as well as I can? There seems
to be another pair in front now, and another driver; those that led
off at the start must have been disabled out on the plain. I saw them
at first making their way round the doubling-post, but now, though
I search the plain of Troy, I cannot find them. Perhaps the reins
fell from the driver's hand so that he lost command of his horses
at the doubling-post, and could not turn it. I suppose he must have
been thrown out there, and broken his chariot, while his mares have
left the course and gone off wildly in a panic. Come up and see for
yourselves, I cannot make out for certain, but the driver seems an
Aetolian by descent, ruler over the Argives, brave Diomed the son
of Tydeus." 

Ajax the son of Oileus took him up rudely and said, "Idomeneus, why
should you be in such a hurry to tell us all about it, when the mares
are still so far out upon the plain? You are none of the youngest,
nor your eyes none of the sharpest, but you are always laying down
the law. You have no right to do so, for there are better men here
than you are. Eumelus's horses are in front now, as they always have
been, and he is on the chariot holding the reins." 

The captain of the Cretans was angry, and answered, "Ajax you are
an excellent railer, but you have no judgement, and are wanting in
much else as well, for you have a vile temper. I will wager you a
tripod or cauldron, and Agamemnon son of Atreus shall decide whose
horses are first. You will then know to your cost." 

Ajax son of Oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there would
have been yet further brawling between them, had not Achilles risen
in his place and said, "Cease your railing Ajax and Idomeneus; it
is not you would be scandalised if you saw any one else do the like:
sit down and keep your eyes on the horses; they are speeding towards
the winning-post and will be bere directly. You will then both of
you know whose horses are first, and whose come after." 

As he was speaking, the son of Tydeus came driving in, plying his
whip lustily from his shoulder, and his horses stepping high as they
flew over the course. The sand and grit rained thick on the driver,
and the chariot inlaid with gold and tin ran close behind his fleet
horses. There was little trace of wheel-marks in the fine dust, and
the horses came flying in at their utmost speed. Diomed stayed them
in the middle of the crowd, and the sweat from their manes and chests
fell in streams on to the ground. Forthwith he sprang from his goodly
chariot, and leaned his whip against his horses' yoke; brave Sthenelus
now lost no time, but at once brought on the prize, and gave the woman
and the ear-handled cauldron to his comrades to take away. Then he
unyoked the horses. 

Next after him came in Antilochus of the race of Neleus, who had passed
Menelaus by a trick and not by the fleetness of his horses; but even
so Menelaus came in as close behind him as the wheel is to the horse
that draws both the chariot and its master. The end hairs of a horse's
tail touch the tyre of the wheel, and there is never much space between
wheel and horse when the chariot is going; Menelaus was no further
than this behind Antilochus, though at first he had been a full disc's
throw behind him. He had soon caught him up again, for Agamemnon's
mare Aethe kept pulling stronger and stronger, so that if the course
had been longer he would have passed him, and there would not even
have been a dead heat. Idomeneus's brave squire Meriones was about
a spear's cast behind Menelaus. His horses were slowest of all, and
he was the worst driver. Last of them all came the son of Admetus,
dragging his chariot and driving his horses on in front. When Achilles
saw him he was sorry, and stood up among the Argives saying, "The
best man is coming in last. Let us give him a prize for it is reasonable.
He shall have the second, but the first must go to the son of Tydeus."

Thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying,
and were for doing as he had said, but Nestor's son Antilochus stood
up and claimed his rights from the son of Peleus. "Achilles," said
he, "I shall take it much amiss if you do this thing; you would rob
me of my prize, because you think Eumelus's chariot and horses were
thrown out, and himself too, good man that he is. He should have prayed
duly to the immortals; he would not have come in fast if he had done
so. If you are sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in
your tents, with bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. Take something
from this store if you would have the Achaeans speak well of you,
and give him a better prize even than that which you have now offered;
but I will not give up the mare, and he that will fight me for her,
let him come on." 

Achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with Antilochus,
who was one of his dearest comrades. So he said- 

"Antilochus, if you would have me find Eumelus another prize, I will
give him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running all round
it which I took from Asteropaeus. It will be worth much money to him."

He bade his comrade Automedon bring the breastplate from his tent,
and he did so. Achilles then gave it over to Eumelus, who received
it gladly. 

But Menelaus got up in a rage, furiously angry with Antilochus. An
attendant placed his staff in his hands and bade the Argives keep
silence: the hero then addressed them. "Antilochus," said he, "what
is this from you who have been so far blameless? You have made me
cut a poor figure and baulked my horses by flinging your own in front
of them, though yours are much worse than mine are; therefore, O princes
and counsellors of the Argives, judge between us and show no favour,
lest one of the Achaeans say, 'Menelaus has got the mare through lying
and corruption; his horses were far inferior to Antilochus's, but
he has greater weight and influence.' Nay, I will determine the matter
myself, and no man will blame me, for I shall do what is just. Come
here, Antilochus, and stand, as our custom is, whip in hand before
your chariot and horses; lay your hand on your steeds, and swear by
earth-encircling Neptune that you did not purposely and guilefully
get in the way of my horses." 

And Antilochus answered, "Forgive me; I am much younger, King Menelaus,
than you are; you stand higher than I do and are the better man of
the two; you know how easily young men are betrayed into indiscretion;
their tempers are more hasty and they have less judgement; make due
allowances therefore, and bear with me; I will of my own accord give
up the mare that I have won, and if you claim any further chattel
from my own possessions, I would rather yield it to you, at once,
than fall from your good graces henceforth, and do wrong in the sight
of heaven." 

The son of Nestor then took the mare and gave her over to Menelaus,
whose anger was thus appeased; as when dew falls upon a field of ripening
corn, and the lands are bristling with the harvest- even so, O Menelaus,
was your heart made glad within you. He turned to Antilochus and said,
"Now, Antilochus, angry though I have been, I can give way to you
of my own free will; you have never been headstrong nor ill-disposed
hitherto, but this time your youth has got the better of your judgement;
be careful how you outwit your betters in future; no one else could
have brought me round so easily, but your good father, your brother,
and yourself have all of you had infinite trouble on my behalf; I
therefore yield to your entreaty, and will give up the mare to you,
mine though it indeed be; the people will thus see that I am neither
harsh nor vindictive." 

With this he gave the mare over to Antilochus's comrade Noemon, and
then took the cauldron. Meriones, who had come in fourth, carried
off the two talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the two-handled
urn, being unawarded, Achilles gave it to Nestor, going up to him
among the assembled Argives and saying, "Take this, my good old friend,
as an heirloom and memorial of the funeral of Patroclus- for you shall
see him no more among the Argives. I give you this prize though you
cannot win one; you can now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot
enter for the javelin-match nor foot-races, for the hand of age has
been laid heavily upon you." 

So saying he gave the urn over to Nestor, who received it gladly and
answered, "My son, all that you have said is true; there is no strength
now in my legs and feet, nor can I hit out with my hands from either
shoulder. Would that I were still young and strong as when the Epeans
were burying King Amarynceus in Buprasium, and his sons offered prizes
in his honour. There was then none that could vie with me neither
of the Epeans nor the Pylians themselves nor the Aetolians. In boxing
I overcame Clytomedes son of Enops, and in wrestling, Ancaeus of Pleuron
who had come forward against me. Iphiclus was a good runner, but I
beat him, and threw farther with my spear than either Phyleus or Polydorus.
In chariot-racing alone did the two sons of Actor surpass me by crowding
their horses in front of me, for they were angry at the way victory
had gone, and at the greater part of the prizes remaining in the place
in which they had been offered. They were twins, and the one kept
on holding the reins, and holding the reins, while the other plied
the whip. Such was I then, but now I must leave these matters to younger
men; I must bow before the weight of years, but in those days I was
eminent among heroes. And now, sir, go on with the funeral contests
in honour of your comrade: gladly do I accept this urn, and my heart
rejoices that you do not forget me but are ever mindful of my goodwill
towards you, and of the respect due to me from the Achaeans. For all
which may the grace of heaven be vouchsafed you in great abundance."

Thereon the son of Peleus, when he had listened to all the thanks
of Nestor, went about among the concourse of the Achaeans, and presently
offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing. He brought
out a strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of the crowd- a
she-mule never yet broken, but six years old- when it is hardest of
all to break them: this was for the victor, and for the vanquished
he offered a double cup. Then he stood up and said among the Argives,
"Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, I invite our two champion
boxers to lay about them lustily and compete for these prizes. He
to whom Apollo vouchsafes the greater endurance, and whom the Achaeans
acknowledge as victor, shall take the mule back with him to his own
tent, while he that is vanquished shall have the double cup."

As he spoke there stood up a champion both brave and great stature,
a skilful boxer, Epeus, son of Panopeus. He laid his hand on the mule
and said, "Let the man who is to have the cup come hither, for none
but myself will take the mule. I am the best boxer of all here present,
and none can beat me. Is it not enough that I should fall short of
you in actual fighting? Still, no man can be good at everything. I
tell you plainly, and it shall come true; if any man will box with
me I will bruise his body and break his bones; therefore let his friends
stay here in a body and be at hand to take him away when I have done
with him." 

They all held their peace, and no man rose save Euryalus son of Mecisteus,
who was son of Talaus. Mecisteus went once to Thebes after the fall
of Oedipus, to attend his funeral, and he beat all the people of Cadmus.
The son of Tydeus was Euryalus's second, cheering him on and hoping
heartily that he would win. First he put a waistband round him and
then he gave him some well-cut thongs of ox-hide; the two men being
now girt went into the middle of the ring, and immediately fell to;
heavily indeed did they punish one another and lay about them with
their brawny fists. One could hear the horrid crashing of their jaws,
and they sweated from every pore of their skin. Presently Epeus came
on and gave Euryalus a blow on the jaw as he was looking round; Euryalus
could not keep his legs; they gave way under him in a moment and he
sprang up with a bound, as a fish leaps into the air near some shore
that is all bestrewn with sea-wrack, when Boreas furs the top of the
waves, and then falls back into deep water. But noble Epeus caught
hold of him and raised him up; his comrades also came round him and
led him from the ring, unsteady in his gait, his head hanging on one
side, and spitting great clots of gore. They set him down in a swoon
and then went to fetch the double cup. 

The son of Peleus now brought out the prizes for the third contest
and showed them to the Argives. These were for the painful art of
wrestling. For the winner there was a great tripod ready for setting
upon the fire, and the Achaeans valued it among themselves at twelve
oxen. For the loser he brought out a woman skilled in all manner of
arts, and they valued her at four oxen. He rose and said among the
Argives, "Stand forward, you who will essay this contest."

Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, and crafty Ulysses,
full of wiles rose also. The two girded themselves and went into the
middle of the ring. They gripped each other in their strong hands
like the rafters which some master-builder frames for the roof of
a high house to keep the wind out. Their backbones cracked as they
tugged at one another with their mighty arms- and sweat rained from
them in torrents. Many a bloody weal sprang up on their sides and
shoulders, but they kept on striving with might and main for victory
and to win the tripod. Ulysses could not throw Ajax, nor Ajax him;
Ulysses was too strong for him; but when the Achaeans began to tire
of watching them, Ajax said to ulysses, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes,
you shall either lift me, or I you, and let Jove settle it between
us." 

He lifted him from the ground as he spoke, but Ulysses did not forget
his cunning. He hit Ajax in the hollow at back of his knee, so that
he could not keep his feet, but fell on his back with Ulysses lying
upon his chest, and all who saw it marvelled. Then Ulysses in turn
lifted Ajax and stirred him a little from the ground but could not
lift him right off it, his knee sank under him, and the two fell side
by side on the ground and were all begrimed with dust. They now sprang
towards one another and were for wrestling yet a third time, but Achilles
rose and stayed them. "Put not each other further," said he, "to such
cruel suffering; the victory is with both alike, take each of you
an equal prize, and let the other Achaeans now compete."

Thus did he speak and they did even as he had said, and put on their
shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.

The son of Peleus then offered prizes for speed in running- a mixing-bowl
beautifully wrought, of pure silver. It would hold six measures, and
far exceeded all others in the whole world for beauty; it was the
work of cunning artificers in Sidon, and had been brought into port
by Phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it to
Thoas. Eueneus son of jason had given it to Patroclus in ransom of
Priam's son Lycaon, and Achilles now offered it as a prize in honour
of his comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. For the second
prize he offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there
was to be half a talent of gold. He then rose and said among the Argives,
"Stand forward, you who will essay this contest." 

Forthwith uprose fleet Ajax son of Oileus, with cunning Ulysses, and
Nestor's son Antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of
his time. They stood side by side and Achilles showed them the goal.
The course was set out for them from the starting-post, and the son
of Oileus took the lead at once, with Ulysses as close behind him
as the shuttle is to a woman's bosom when she throws the woof across
the warp and holds it close up to her; even so close behind him was
Ulysses- treading in his footprints before the dust could settle there,
and Ajax could feel his breath on the back of his head as he ran swiftly
on. The Achaeans all shouted applause as they saw him straining his
utmost, and cheered him as he shot past them; but when they were now
nearing the end of the course Ulysses prayed inwardly to Minerva.
"Hear me," he cried, "and help my feet, O goddess." Thus did he pray,
and Pallas Minerva heard his prayer; she made his hands and his feet
feel light, and when the runners were at the point of pouncing upon
the prize, Ajax, through Minerva's spite slipped upon some offal that
was lying there from the cattle which Achilles had slaughtered in
honour of Patroclus, and his mouth and nostrils were all filled with
cow dung. Ulysses therefore carried off the mixing-bowl, for he got
before Ajax and came in first. But Ajax took the ox and stood with
his hand on one of its horns, spitting the dung out of his mouth.
Then he said to the Argives, "Alas, the goddess has spoiled my running;
she watches over Ulysses and stands by him as though she were his
own mother." Thus did he speak and they all of them laughed heartily.

Antilochus carried off the last prize and smiled as he said to the
bystanders, "You all see, my friends, that now too the gods have shown
their respect for seniority. Ajax is somewhat older than I am, and
as for Ulysses, he belongs to an earlier generation, but he is hale
in spite of his years, and no man of the Achaeans can run against
him save only Achilles." 

He said this to pay a compliment to the son of Peleus, and Achilles
answered, "Antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose;
I shall give you an additional half talent of gold." He then gave
the half talent to Antilochus, who received it gladly. 

Then the son of Peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that
had been borne by Sarpedon, and were taken from him by Patroclus.
He stood up and said among the Argives, "We bid two champions put
on their armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another
in the presence of the multitude; whichever of them can first wound
the flesh of the other, cut through his armour, and draw blood, to
him will I give this goodly Thracian sword inlaid with silver, which
I took from Asteropaeus, but the armour let both hold in partnership,
and I will give each of them a hearty meal in my own tent."

Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, as also mighty Diomed
son of Tydeus. When they had put on their armour each on his own side
of the ring, they both went into the middle eager to engage, and with
fire flashing from their eyes. The Achaeans marvelled as they beheld
them, and when the two were now close up with one another, thrice
did they spring forward and thrice try to strike each other in close
combat. Ajax pierced Diomed's round shield, but did not draw blood,
for the cuirass beneath the shield protected him; thereon the son
of Tydeus from over his huge shield kept aiming continually at Ajax's
neck with the point of his spear, and the Achaeans alarmed for his
safety bade them leave off fighting and divide the prize between them.
Achilles then gave the great sword to the son of Tydeus, with its
scabbard, and the leathern belt with which to hang it. 

Achilles next offered the massive iron quoit which mighty Eetion had
erewhile been used to hurl, until Achilles had slain him and carried
it off in his ships along with other spoils. He stood up and said
among the Argives, "Stand forward, you who would essay this contest.
He who wins it will have a store of iron that will last him five years
as they go rolling round, and if his fair fields lie far from a town
his shepherd or ploughman will not have to make a journey to buy iron,
for he will have a stock of it on his own premises." 

Then uprose the two mighty men Polypoetes and Leonteus, with Ajax
son of Telamon and noble Epeus. They stood up one after the other
and Epeus took the quoit, whirled it, and flung it from him, which
set all the Achaeans laughing. After him threw Leonteus of the race
of Mars. Ajax son of Telamon threw third, and sent the quoit beyond
any mark that had been made yet, but when mighty Polypoetes took the
quoit he hurled it as though it had been a stockman's stick which
he sends flying about among his cattle when he is driving them, so
far did his throw out-distance those of the others. All who saw it
roared applause, and his comrades carried the prize for him and set
it on board his ship. 

Achilles next offered a prize of iron for archery- ten double-edged
axes and ten with single eddies: he set up a ship's mast, some way
off upon the sands, and with a fine string tied a pigeon to it by
the foot; this was what they were to aim at. "Whoever," he said, "can
hit the pigeon shall have all the axes and take them away with him;
he who hits the string without hitting the bird will have taken a
worse aim and shall have the single-edged axes." 

Then uprose King Teucer, and Meriones the stalwart squire of Idomeneus
rose also, They cast lots in a bronze helmet and the lot of Teucer
fell first. He let fly with his arrow forthwith, but he did not promise
hecatombs of firstling lambs to King Apollo, and missed his bird,
for Apollo foiled his aim; but he hit the string with which the bird
was tied, near its foot; the arrow cut the string clean through so
that it hung down towards the ground, while the bird flew up into
the sky, and the Achaeans shouted applause. Meriones, who had his
arrow ready while Teucer was aiming, snatched the bow out of his hand,
and at once promised that he would sacrifice a hecatomb of firstling
lambs to Apollo lord of the bow; then espying the pigeon high up under
the clouds, he hit her in the middle of the wing as she was circling
upwards; the arrow went clean through the wing and fixed itself in
the ground at Meriones' feet, but the bird perched on the ship's mast
hanging her head and with all her feathers drooping; the life went
out of her, and she fell heavily from the mast. Meriones, therefore,
took all ten double-edged axes, while Teucer bore off the single-edged
ones to his ships. 

Then the son of Peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had
never been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a
pattern of flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up- to
wit the son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, and Meriones, stalwart
squire of Idomeneus. But Achilles spoke saying, "Son of Atreus, we
know how far you excel all others both in power and in throwing the
javelin; take the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it
so please you, let us give the spear to Meriones; this at least is
what I should myself wish." 

King Agamemnon assented. So he gave the bronze spear to Meriones,
and handed the goodly cauldron to Talthybius his esquire.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXIV

The assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to
his own ship. There they made ready their supper, and then bethought
them of the blessed boon of sleep; but Achilles still wept for thinking
of his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could
take no hold upon him. This way and that did he turn as he yearned
after the might and manfulness of Patroclus; he thought of all they
had done together, and all they had gone through both on the field
of battle and on the waves of the weary sea. As he dwelt on these
things he wept bitterly and lay now on his side, now on his back,
and now face downwards, till at last he rose and went out as one distraught
to wander upon the seashore. Then, when he saw dawn breaking over
beach and sea, he yoked his horses to his chariot, and bound the body
of Hector behind it that he might drag it about. Thrice did he drag
it round the tomb of the son of Menoetius, and then went back into
his tent, leaving the body on the ground full length and with its
face downwards. But Apollo would not suffer it to be disfigured, for
he pitied the man, dead though he now was; therefore he shielded him
with his golden aegis continually, that he might take no hurt while
Achilles was dragging him. 

Thus shamefully did Achilles in his fury dishonour Hector; but the
blessed gods looked down in pity from heaven, and urged Mercury, slayer
of Argus, to steal the body. All were of this mind save only Juno,
Neptune, and Jove's grey-eyed daughter, who persisted in the hate
which they had ever borne towards Ilius with Priam and his people;
for they forgave not the wrong done them by Alexandrus in disdaining
the goddesses who came to him when he was in his sheepyards, and preferring
her who had offered him a wanton to his ruin. 

When, therefore, the morning of the twelfth day had now come, Phoebus
Apollo spoke among the immortals saying, "You gods ought to be ashamed
of yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. Did not Hector burn
you thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished goats? And now dare
you not rescue even his dead body, for his wife to look upon, with
his mother and child, his father Priam, and his people, who would
forthwith commit him to the flames, and give him his due funeral rites?
So, then, you would all be on the side of mad Achilles, who knows
neither right nor ruth? He is like some savage lion that in the pride
of his great strength and daring springs upon men's flocks and gorges
on them. Even so has Achilles flung aside all pity, and all that conscience
which at once so greatly banes yet greatly boons him that will heed
it. man may lose one far dearer than Achilles has lost- a son, it
may be, or a brother born from his own mother's womb; yet when he
has mourned him and wept over him he will let him bide, for it takes
much sorrow to kill a man; whereas Achilles, now that he has slain
noble Hector, drags him behind his chariot round the tomb of his comrade.
It were better of him, and for him, that he should not do so, for
brave though he be we gods may take it ill that he should vent his
fury upon dead clay." 

Juno spoke up in a rage. "This were well," she cried, "O lord of the
silver bow, if you would give like honour to Hector and to Achilles;
but Hector was mortal and suckled at a woman's breast, whereas Achilles
is the offspring of a goddess whom I myself reared and brought up.
I married her to Peleus, who is above measure dear to the immortals;
you gods came all of you to her wedding; you feasted along with them
yourself and brought your lyre- false, and fond of low company, that
you have ever been." 

Then said Jove, "Juno, be not so bitter. Their honour shall not be
equal, but of all that dwell in Ilius, Hector was dearest to the gods,
as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. Never was my
altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of
sacrifice which we claim of right. I shall therefore permit the body
of mighty Hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without
Achilles coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside
him. Let some one of you, therefore, send Thetis to me, and I will
impart my counsel to her, namely that Achilles is to accept a ransom
from Priam, and give up the body." 

On this Iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message. Down
she plunged into the dark sea midway between Samos and rocky Imbrus;
the waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank into the bottom
as the lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is sped to carry death
to fishes. She found Thetis sitting in a great cave with the other
sea-goddesses gathered round her; there she sat in the midst of them
weeping for her noble son who was to fall far from his own land, on
the rich plains of Troy. Iris went up to her and said, "Rise Thetis;
Jove, whose counsels fail not, bids you come to him." And Thetis answered,
"Why does the mighty god so bid me? I am in great grief, and shrink
from going in and out among the immortals. Still, I will go, and the
word that he may speak shall not be spoken in vain." 

The goddess took her dark veil, than which there can be no robe more
sombre, and went forth with fleet Iris leading the way before her.
The waves of the sea opened them a path, and when they reached the
shore they flew up into the heavens, where they found the all-seeing
son of Saturn with the blessed gods that live for ever assembled near
him. Minerva gave up her seat to her, and she sat down by the side
of father Jove. Juno then placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and
spoke to her in words of comfort, whereon Thetis drank and gave her
back the cup; and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.

"So, goddess," said he, "for all your sorrow, and the grief that I
well know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to Olympus,
and I will tell you why I have sent for you. This nine days past the
immortals have been quarrelling about Achilles waster of cities and
the body of Hector. The gods would have Mercury slayer of Argus steal
the body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward,
I will concede such honour to your son as I will now tell you. Go,
then, to the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods
are angry with him, and that I am myself more angry than them all,
in that he keeps Hector at the ships and will not give him up. He
may thus fear me and let the body go. At the same time I will send
Iris to great Priam to bid him go to the ships of the Achaeans, and
ransom his son, taking with him such gifts for Achilles as may give
him satisfaction. 

Silver-footed Thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down
she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus. She went to her son's
tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades
round him were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had
killed a great woolly sheep. His mother sat down beside him and caressed
him with her hand saying, "My son, how long will you keep on thus
grieving and making moan? You are gnawing at your own heart, and think
neither of food nor of woman's embraces; and yet these too were well,
for you have no long time to live, and death with the strong hand
of fate are already close beside you. Now, therefore, heed what I
say, for I come as a messenger from Jove; he says that the gods are
angry with you, and himself more angry than them all, in that you
keep Hector at the ships and will not give him up. Therefore let him
go, and accept a ransom for his body." 

And Achilles answered, "So be it. If Olympian Jove of his own motion
thus commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the body away."

Thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long discourse
with one another. Meanwhile the son of Saturn sent Iris to the strong
city of Ilius. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, from the mansions of Olympus,
and tell King Priam in Ilius, that he is to go to the ships of the
Achaeans and free the body of his dear son. He is to take such gifts
with him as shall give satisfaction to Achilles, and he is to go alone,
with no other Trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive
his mules and waggon, and bring back the body of him whom noble Achilles
has slain. Let him have no thought nor fear of death in his heart,
for we will send the slayer of Argus to escort him, and bring him
within the tent of Achilles. Achilles will not kill him nor let another
do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he will
entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy." 

On this Iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her message.
She went to Priam's house, and found weeping and lamentation therein.
His sons were seated round their father in the outer courtyard, and
their raiment was wet with tears: the old man sat in the midst of
them with his mantle wrapped close about his body, and his head and
neck all covered with the filth which he had clutched as he lay grovelling
in the mire. His daughters and his sons' wives went wailing about
the house, as they thought of the many and brave men who lay dead,
slain by the Argives. The messenger of Jove stood by Priam and spoke
softly to him, but fear fell upon him as she did so. "Take heart,"
she said, "Priam offspring of Dardanus, take heart and fear not. I
bring no evil tidings, but am minded well towards you. I come as a
messenger from Jove, who though he be not near, takes thought for
you and pities you. The lord of Olympus bids you go and ransom noble
Hector, and take with you such gifts as shall give satisfaction to
Achilles. You are to go alone, with no Trojan, save only some honoured
servant who may drive your mules and waggon, and bring back to the
city the body of him whom noble Achilles has slain. You are to have
no thought, nor fear of death, for Jove will send the slayer of Argus
to escort you. When he has brought you within Achilles' tent, Achilles
will not kill you nor let another do so, for he will take heed to
his ways and sin not, and he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable
courtesy." 

Iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and Priam told his sons
to get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast
upon the top of its bed. Then he went down into his fragrant store-room,
high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were
kept, and he called Hecuba his wife. "Wife," said he, "a messenger
has come to me from Olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of
the Achaeans to ransom my dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall
give satisfaction to Achilles. What think you of this matter? for
my own part I am greatly moved to pass through the of the Achaeans
and go to their ships." 

His wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, "Alas, what has become
of that judgement for which you have been ever famous both among strangers
and your own people? How can you venture alone to the ships of the
Achaeans, and look into the face of him who has slain so many of your
brave sons? You must have iron courage, for if the cruel savage sees
you and lays hold on you, he will know neither respect nor pity. Let
us then weep Hector from afar here in our own house, for when I gave
him birth the threads of overruling fate were spun for him that dogs
should eat his flesh far from his parents, in the house of that terrible
man on whose liver I would fain fasten and devour it. Thus would I
avenge my son, who showed no cowardice when Achilles slew him, and
thought neither of Right nor of avoiding battle as he stood in defence
of Trojan men and Trojan women." 

Then Priam said, "I would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as a
bird of ill omen in my house, for you will not move me. Had it been
some mortal man who had sent me some prophet or priest who divines
from sacrifice- I should have deemed him false and have given him
no heed; but now I have heard the goddess and seen her face to face,
therefore I will go and her saying shall not be in vain. If it be
my fate to die at the ships of the Achaeans even so would I have it;
let Achilles slay me, if I may but first have taken my son in my arms
and mourned him to my heart's comforting." 

So saying he lifted the lids of his chests, and took out twelve goodly
vestments. He took also twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs,
twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. He weighed out
ten talents of gold, and brought moreover two burnished tripods, four
cauldrons, and a very beautiful cup which the Thracians had given
him when he had gone to them on an embassy; it was very precious,
but he grudged not even this, so eager was he to ransom the body of
his son. Then he chased all the Trojans from the court and rebuked
them with words of anger. "Out," he cried, "shame and disgrace to
me that you are. Have you no grief in your own homes that you are
come to plague me here? Is it a small thing, think you, that the son
of Saturn has sent this sorrow upon me, to lose the bravest of my
sons? Nay, you shall prove it in person, for now he is gone the Achaeans
will have easier work in killing you. As for me, let me go down within
the house of Hades, ere mine eyes behold the sacking and wasting of
the city." 

He drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the old
man sped them. Then he called to his sons, upbraiding Helenus, Paris,
noble Agathon, Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites of the loud battle-cry,
Deiphobus, Hippothous, and Dius. These nine did the old man call near
him. "Come to me at once," he cried, "worthless sons who do me shame;
would that you had all been killed at the ships rather than Hector.
Miserable man that I am, I have had the bravest sons in all Troy-
noble Nestor, Troilus the dauntless charioteer, and Hector who was
a god among men, so that one would have thought he was son to an immortal-
yet there is not one of them left. Mars has slain them and those of
whom I am ashamed are alone left me. Liars, and light of foot, heroes
of the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own people, why
do you not get a waggon ready for me at once, and put all these things
upon it that I may set out on my way?" 

Thus did he speak, and they feared the rebuke of their father. They
brought out a strong mule-waggon, newly made, and set the body of
the waggon fast on its bed. They took the mule-yoke from the peg on
which it hung, a yoke of boxwood with a knob on the top of it and
rings for the reins to go through. Then they brought a yoke-band eleven
cubits long, to bind the yoke to the pole; they bound it on at the
far end of the pole, and put the ring over the upright pin making
it fast with three turns of the band on either side the knob, and
bending the thong of the yoke beneath it. This done, they brought
from the store-chamber the rich ransom that was to purchase the body
of Hector, and they set it all orderly on the waggon; then they yoked
the strong harness-mules which the Mysians had on a time given as
a goodly present to Priam; but for Priam himself they yoked horses
which the old king had bred, and kept for own use. 

Thus heedfully did Priam and his servant see to the yolking of their
cars at the palace. Then Hecuba came to them all sorrowful, with a
golden goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might make a drink-offering
before they set out. She stood in front of the horses and said, "Take
this, make a drink-offering to father Jove, and since you are minded
to go to the ships in spite of me, pray that you may come safely back
from the hands of your enemies. Pray to the son of Saturn lord of
the whirlwind, who sits on Ida and looks down over all Troy, pray
him to send his swift messenger on your right hand, the bird of omen
which is strongest and most dear to him of all birds, that you may
see it with your own eyes and trust it as you go forth to the ships
of the Danaans. If all-seeing Jove will not send you this messenger,
however set upon it you may be, I would not have you go to the ships
of the Argives." 

And Priam answered, "Wife, I will do as you desire me; it is well
to lift hands in prayer to Jove, if so be he may have mercy upon me."

With this the old man bade the serving-woman pour pure water over
his hands, and the woman came, bearing the water in a bowl. He washed
his hands and took the cup from his wife; then he made the drink-offering
and prayed, standing in the middle of the courtyard and turning his
eyes to heaven. "Father Jove," he said, "that rulest from Ida, most
glorious and most great, grant that I may be received kindly and compassionately
in the tents of Achilles; and send your swift messenger upon my right
hand, the bird of omen which is strongest and most dear to you of
all birds, that I may see it with my own eyes and trust it as I go
forth to the ships of the Danaans." 

So did he pray, and Jove the lord of counsel heard his prayer. Forthwith
he sent an eagle, the most unerring portent of all birds that fly,
the dusky hunter that men also call the Black Eagle. His wings were
spread abroad on either side as wide as the well-made and well-bolted
door of a rich man's chamber. He came to them flying over the city
upon their right hands, and when they saw him they were glad and their
hearts took comfort within them. The old man made haste to mount his
chariot, and drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing
gatehouse of the outer court. Before him went the mules drawing the
four-wheeled waggon, and driven by wise Idaeus; behind these were
the horses, which the old man lashed with his whip and drove swiftly
through the city, while his friends followed after, wailing and lamenting
for him as though he were on his road to death. As soon as they had
come down from the city and had reached the plain, his sons and sons-in-law
who had followed him went back to Ilius. 

But Priam and Idaeus as they showed out upon the plain did not escape
the ken of all-seeing Jove, who looked down upon the old man and pitied
him; then he spoke to his son Mercury and said, "Mercury, for it is
you who are the most disposed to escort men on their way, and to hear
those whom you will hear, go, and so conduct Priam to the ships of
the Achaeans that no other of the Danaans shall see him nor take note
of him until he reach the son of Peleus." 

Thus he spoke and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did
as he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals
with which he could fly like the wind over land and sea; he took the
wand with which he seals men's eyes in sleep, or wakes them just as
he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand till he came to Troy and
to the Hellespont. To look at, he was like a young man of noble birth
in the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon
his face. 

Now when Priam and Idaeus had driven past the great tomb of Ilius,
they stayed their mules and horses that they might drink in the river,
for the shades of night were falling, when, therefore, Idaeus saw
Mercury standing near them he said to Priam, "Take heed, descendant
of Dardanus; here is matter which demands consideration. I see a man
who I think will presently fall upon us; let us fly with our horses,
or at least embrace his knees and implore him to take compassion upon
us? 

When he heard this the old man's heart failed him, and he was in great
fear; he stayed where he was as one dazed, and the hair stood on end
over his whole body; but the bringer of good luck came up to him and
took him by the hand, saying, "Whither, father, are you thus driving
your mules and horses in the dead of night when other men are asleep?
Are you not afraid of the fierce Achaeans who are hard by you, so
cruel and relentless? Should some one of them see you bearing so much
treasure through the darkness of the flying night, what would not
your state then be? You are no longer young, and he who is with you
is too old to protect you from those who would attack you. For myself,
I will do you no harm, and I will defend you from any one else, for
you remind me of my own father." 

And Priam answered, "It is indeed as you say, my dear son; nevertheless
some god has held his hand over me, in that he has sent such a wayfarer
as yourself to meet me so Opportunely; you are so comely in mien and
figure, and your judgement is so excellent that you must come of blessed
parents." 

Then said the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "Sir, all that
you have said is right; but tell me and tell me true, are you taking
this rich treasure to send it to a foreign people where it may be
safe, or are you all leaving strong Ilius in dismay now that your
son has fallen who was the bravest man among you and was never lacking
in battle with the Achaeans?" 

And Priam said, "Wo are you, my friend, and who are your parents,
that you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy son?"

The slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, answered him, "Sir, you would
prove me, that you question me about noble Hector. Many a time have
I set eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the Argives to their
ships and putting them to the sword. We stood still and marvelled,
for Achilles in his anger with the son of Atreus suffered us not to
fight. I am his squire, and came with him in the same ship. I am a
Myrmidon, and my father's name is Polyctor: he is a rich man and about
as old as you are; he has six sons besides myself, and I am the seventh.
We cast lots, and it fell upon me to sail hither with Achilles. I
am now come from the ships on to the plain, for with daybreak the
Achaeans will set battle in array about the city. They chafe at doing
nothing, and are so eager that their princes cannot hold them back."

Then answered Priam, "If you are indeed the squire of Achilles son
of Peleus, tell me now the Whole truth. Is my son still at the ships,
or has Achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him to his hounds?"

"Sir," replied the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "neither hounds
nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying at the
tents by the ship of Achilles, and though it is now twelve days that
he has lain there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the worms eaten
him although they feed on warriors. At daybreak Achilles drags him
cruelly round the sepulchre of his dear comrade, but it does him no
hurt. You should come yourself and see how he lies fresh as dew, with
the blood all washed away, and his wounds every one of them closed
though many pierced him with their spears. Such care have the blessed
gods taken of your brave son, for he was dear to them beyond all measure."

The old man was comforted as he heard him and said, "My son, see what
a good thing it is to have made due offerings to the immortals; for
as sure as that he was born my son never forgot the gods that hold
Olympus, and now they requite it to him even in death. Accept therefore
at my hands this goodly chalice; guard me and with heaven's help guide
me till I come to the tent of the son of Peleus." 

Then answered the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "Sir, you are
tempting me and playing upon my youth, but you shall not move me,
for you are offering me presents without the knowledge of Achilles
whom I fear and hold it great guiltless to defraud, lest some evil
presently befall me; but as your guide I would go with you even to
Argos itself, and would guard you so carefully whether by sea or land,
that no one should attack you through making light of him who was
with you." 

The bringer of good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing
the whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses.
When they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships,
those who were on guard had just been getting their suppers, and the
slayer of Argus threw them all into a deep sleep. Then he drew back
the bolts to open the gates, and took Priam inside with the treasure
he had upon his waggon. Ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of
the son of Peleus for which the Myrmidons had cut pine and which they
had built for their king; when they had built it they thatched it
with coarse tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and
all round it they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes
set close together. The gate was barred with a single bolt of pine
which it took three men to force into its place, and three to draw
back so as to open the gate, but Achilles could draw it by himself.
Mercury opened the gate for the old man, and brought in the treasure
that he was taking with him for the son of Peleus. Then he sprang
from the chariot on to the ground and said, "Sir, it is I, immortal
Mercury, that am come with you, for my father sent me to escort you.
I will now leave you, and will not enter into the presence of Achilles,
for it might anger him that a god should befriend mortal men thus
openly. Go you within, and embrace the knees of the son of Peleus:
beseech him by his father, his lovely mother, and his son; thus you
may move him." 

With these words Mercury went back to high Olympus. Priam sprang from
his chariot to the ground, leaving Idaeus where he was, in charge
of the mules and horses. The old man went straight into the house
where Achilles, loved of the gods, was sitting. There he found him
with his men seated at a distance from him: only two, the hero Automedon,
and Alcimus of the race of Mars, were busy in attendance about his
person, for he had but just done eating and drinking, and the table
was still there. King Priam entered without their seeing him, and
going right up to Achilles he clasped his knees and kissed the dread
murderous hands that had slain so many of his sons. 

As when some cruel spite has befallen a man that he should have killed
some one in his own country, and must fly to a great man's protection
in a land of strangers, and all marvel who see him, even so did Achilles
marvel as he beheld Priam. The others looked one to another and marvelled
also, but Priam besought Achilles saying, "Think of your father, O
Achilles like unto the gods, who is such even as I am, on the sad
threshold of old age. It may be that those who dwell near him harass
him, and there is none to keep war and ruin from him. Yet when he
hears of you being still alive, he is glad, and his days are full
of hope that he shall see his dear son come home to him from Troy;
but I, wretched man that I am, had the bravest in all Troy for my
sons, and there is not one of them left. I had fifty sons when the
Achaeans came here; nineteen of them were from a single womb, and
the others were borne to me by the women of my household. The greater
part of them has fierce Mars laid low, and Hector, him who was alone
left, him who was the guardian of the city and ourselves, him have
you lately slain; therefore I am now come to the ships of the Achaeans
to ransom his body from you with a great ransom. Fear, O Achilles,
the wrath of heaven; think on your own father and have compassion
upon me, who am the more pitiable, for I have steeled myself as no
man yet has ever steeled himself before me, and have raised to my
lips the hand of him who slew my son." 

Thus spoke Priam, and the heart of Achilles yearned as he bethought
him of his father. He took the old man's hand and moved him gently
away. The two wept bitterly- Priam, as he lay at Achilles' feet, weeping
for Hector, and Achilles now for his father and now for Patroclous,
till the house was filled with their lamentation. But when Achilles
was now sated with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his
sorrow, he left his seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity
for his white hair and beard; then he said, "Unhappy man, you have
indeed been greatly daring; how could you venture to come alone to
the ships of the Achaeans, and enter the presence of him who has slain
so many of your brave sons? You must have iron courage: sit now upon
this seat, and for all our grief we will hide our sorrows in our hearts,
for weeping will not avail us. The immortals know no care, yet the
lot they spin for man is full of sorrow; on the floor of Jove's palace
there stand two urns, the one filled with evil gifts, and the other
with good ones. He for whom Jove the lord of thunder mixes the gifts
he sends, will meet now with good and now with evil fortune; but he
to whom Jove sends none but evil gifts will be pointed at by the finger
of scorn, the hand of famine will pursue him to the ends of the world,
and he will go up and down the face of the earth, respected neither
by gods nor men. Even so did it befall Peleus; the gods endowed him
with all good things from his birth upwards, for he reigned over the
Myrmidons excelling all men in prosperity and wealth, and mortal though
he was they gave him a goddess for his bride. But even on him too
did heaven send misfortune, for there is no race of royal children
born to him in his house, save one son who is doomed to die all untimely;
nor may I take care of him now that he is growing old, for I must
stay here at Troy to be the bane of you and your children. And you
too, O Priam, I have heard that you were aforetime happy. They say
that in wealth and plenitude of offspring you surpassed all that is
in Lesbos, the realm of Makar to the northward, Phrygia that is more
inland, and those that dwell upon the great Hellespont; but from the
day when the dwellers in heaven sent this evil upon you, war and slaughter
have been about your city continually. Bear up against it, and let
there be some intervals in your sorrow. Mourn as you may for your
brave son, you will take nothing by it. You cannot raise him from
the dead, ere you do so yet another sorrow shall befall you."

And Priam answered, "O king, bid me not be seated, while Hector is
still lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great ransom
which I have brought you, and give him to me at once that I may look
upon him. May you prosper with the ransom and reach your own land
in safety, seeing that you have suffered me to live and to look upon
the light of the sun." 

Achilles looked at him sternly and said, "Vex me, sir, no longer;
I am of myself minded to give up the body of Hector. My mother, daughter
of the old man of the sea, came to me from Jove to bid me deliver
it to you. Moreover I know well, O Priam, and you cannot hide it,
that some god has brought you to the ships of the Achaeans, for else,
no man however strong and in his prime would dare to come to our host;
he could neither pass our guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates
thus easily; therefore, provoke me no further, lest I sin against
the word of Jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within
my tents." 

The old man feared him and obeyed. Then the son of Peleus sprang like
a lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went
his two squires Automedon and Alcimus who were closer to him than
any others of his comrades now that Patroclus was no more. These unyoked
the horses and mules, and bade Priam's herald and attendant be seated
within the house. They lifted the ransom for Hector's body from the
waggon. but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that Achilles
might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. Then
he called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint
it, but he first took it to a place where Priam should not see it,
lest if he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of his grief,
and enrage Achilles, who might then kill him and sin against the word
of Jove. When the servants had washed the body and anointed it, and
had wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle, Achilles himself lifted
it on to a bier, and he and his men then laid it on the waggon. He
cried aloud as he did so and called on the name of his dear comrade,
"Be not angry with me, Patroclus," he said, "if you hear even in the
house of Hades that I have given Hector to his father for a ransom.
It has been no unworthy one, and I will share it equitably with you."

Achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right
angles to the one against which Priam was sitting. "Sir," he said,
"your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to desire;
you shall look upon him when you him away at daybreak; for the present
let us prepare our supper. Even lovely Niobe had to think about eating,
though her twelve children- six daughters and six lusty sons- had
been all slain in her house. Apollo killed the sons with arrows from
his silver bow, to punish Niobe, and Diana slew the daughters, because
Niobe had vaunted herself against Leto; she said Leto had borne two
children only, whereas she had herself borne many- whereon the two
killed the many. Nine days did they lie weltering, and there was none
to bury them, for the son of Saturn turned the people into stone;
but on the tenth day the gods in heaven themselves buried them, and
Niobe then took food, being worn out with weeping. They say that somewhere
among the rocks on the mountain pastures of Sipylus, where the nymphs
live that haunt the river Achelous, there, they say, she lives in
stone and still nurses the sorrows sent upon her by the hand of heaven.
Therefore, noble sir, let us two now take food; you can weep for your
dear son hereafter as you are bearing him back to Ilius- and many
a tear will he cost you." 

With this Achilles sprang from his seat and killed a sheep of silvery
whiteness, which his followers skinned and made ready all in due order.
They cut the meat carefully up into smaller pieces, spitted them,
and drew them off again when they were well roasted. Automedon brought
bread in fair baskets and served it round the table, while Achilles
dealt out the meat, and they laid their hands on the good things that
were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
Priam, descendant of Dardanus, marvelled at the strength and beauty
of Achilles for he was as a god to see, and Achilles marvelled at
Priam as he listened to him and looked upon his noble presence. When
they had gazed their fill Priam spoke first. "And now, O king," he
said, "take me to my couch that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed
boon of sleep. Never once have my eyes been closed from the day your
hands took the life of my son; I have grovelled without ceasing in
the mire of my stable-yard, making moan and brooding over my countless
sorrows. Now, moreover, I have eaten bread and drunk wine; hitherto
I have tasted nothing." 

As he spoke Achilles told his men and the women-servants to set beds
in the room that was in the gatehouse, and make them with good red
rugs, and spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks
for Priam and Idaeus to wear. So the maids went out carrying a torch
and got the two beds ready in all haste. Then Achilles said laughingly
to Priam, "Dear sir, you shall lie outside, lest some counsellor of
those who in due course keep coming to advise with me should see you
here in the darkness of the flying night, and tell it to Agamemnon.
This might cause delay in the delivery of the body. And now tell me
and tell me true, for how many days would you celebrate the funeral
rites of noble Hector? Tell me, that I may hold aloof from war and
restrain the host." 

And Priam answered, "Since, then, you suffer me to bury my noble son
with all due rites, do thus, Achilles, and I shall be grateful. You
know how we are pent up within our city; it is far for us to fetch
wood from the mountain, and the people live in fear. Nine days, therefore,
will we mourn Hector in my house; on the tenth day we will bury him
and there shall be a public feast in his honour; on the eleventh we
will build a mound over his ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be
need, we will fight." 

And Achilles answered, "All, King Priam, shall be as you have said.
I will stay our fighting for as long a time as you have named."

As he spoke he laid his hand on the old man's right wrist, in token
that he should have no fear; thus then did Priam and his attendant
sleep there in the forecourt, full of thought, while Achilles lay
in an inner room of the house, with fair Briseis by his side.

And now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the livelong
night, but upon Mercury alone, the bringer of good luck, sleep could
take no hold for he was thinking all the time how to get King Priam
away from the ships without his being seen by the strong force of
sentinels. He hovered therefore over Priam's head and said, "Sir,
now that Achilles has spared your life, you seem to have no fear about
sleeping in the thick of your foes. You have paid a great ransom,
and have received the body of your son; were you still alive and a
prisoner the sons whom you have left at home would have to give three
times as much to free you; and so it would be if Agamemnon and the
other Achaeans were to know of your being here." 

When he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant.
Mercury then yoked their horses and mules, and drove them quickly
through the host so that no man perceived them. When they came to
the ford of eddying Xanthus, begotten of immortal Jove, Mercury went
back to high Olympus, and dawn in robe of saffron began to break over
all the land. Priam and Idaeus then drove on toward the city lamenting
and making moan, and the mules drew the body of Hector. No one neither
man nor woman saw them, till Cassandra, fair as golden Venus standing
on Pergamus, caught sight of her dear father in his chariot, and his
servant that was the city's herald with him. Then she saw him that
was lying upon the bier, drawn by the mules, and with a loud cry she
went about the city saying, "Come hither Trojans, men and women, and
look on Hector; if ever you rejoiced to see him coming from battle
when he was alive, look now on him that was the glory of our city
and all our people." 

At this there was not man nor woman left in the city, so great a sorrow
had possessed them. Hard by the gates they met Priam as he was bringing
in the body. Hector's wife and his mother were the first to mourn
him: they flew towards the waggon and laid their hands upon his head,
while the crowd stood weeping round them. They would have stayed before
the gates, weeping and lamenting the livelong day to the going down
of the sun, had not Priam spoken to them from the chariot and said,
"Make way for the mules to pass you. Afterwards when I have taken
the body home you shall have your fill of weeping." 

On this the people stood asunder, and made a way for the waggon. When
they had borne the body within the house they laid it upon a bed and
seated minstrels round it to lead the dirge, whereon the women joined
in the sad music of their lament. Foremost among them all Andromache
led their wailing as she clasped the head of mighty Hector in her
embrace. "Husband," she cried, "you have died young, and leave me
in your house a widow; he of whom we are the ill-starred parents is
still a mere child, and I fear he may not reach manhood. Ere he can
do so our city will be razed and overthrown, for you who watched over
it are no more- you who were its saviour, the guardian of our wives
and children. Our women will be carried away captives to the ships,
and I among them; while you, my child, who will be with me will be
put to some unseemly tasks, working for a cruel master. Or, may be,
some Achaean will hurl you (O miserable death) from our walls, to
avenge some brother, son, or father whom Hector slew; many of them
have indeed bitten the dust at his hands, for your father's hand in
battle was no light one. Therefore do the people mourn him. You have
left, O Hector, sorrow unutterable to your parents, and my own grief
is greatest of all, for you did not stretch forth your arms and embrace
me as you lay dying, nor say to me any words that might have lived
with me in my tears night and day for evermore." 

Bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her lament.
Hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. "Hector," she cried,
"dearest to me of all my children. So long as you were alive the gods
loved you well, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful
of you; for when Achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell
him beyond the seas, to Samos Imbrus or rugged Lemnos; and when he
had slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round
the sepulchre of his comrade- though this could not give him life-
yet here you lie all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom Apollo has
slain with his painless shafts." 

Thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then
Helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "Hector,"
said she, "dearest of all my brothers-in-law-for I am wife to Alexandrus
who brought me hither to Troy- would that I had died ere he did so-
twenty years are come and gone since I left my home and came from
over the sea, but I have never heard one word of insult or unkindness
from you. When another would chide with me, as it might be one of
your brothers or sisters or of your brothers' wives, or my mother-in-law-
for Priam was as kind to me as though he were my own father- you would
rebuke and check them with words of gentleness and goodwill. Therefore
my tears flow both for you and for my unhappy self, for there is no
one else in Troy who is kind to me, but all shrink and shudder as
they go by me." 

She wept as she spoke and the vast crowd that was gathered round her
joined in her lament. Then King Priam spoke to them saying, "Bring
wood, O Trojans, to the city, and fear no cunning ambush of the Argives,
for Achilles when he dismissed me from the ships gave me his word
that they should not attack us until the morning of the twelfth day."

Forthwith they yoked their oxen and mules and gathered together before
the city. Nine days long did they bring in great heaps wood, and on
the morning of the tenth day with many tears they took trave Hector
forth, laid his dead body upon the summit of the pile, and set the
fire thereto. Then when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared
on the eleventh day, the people again assembled, round the pyre of
mighty Hector. When they were got together, they first quenched the
fire with wine wherever it was burning, and then his brothers and
comrades with many a bitter tear gathered his white bones, wrapped
them in soft robes of purple, and laid them in a golden urn, which
they placed in a grave and covered over with large stones set close
together. Then they built a barrow hurriedly over it keeping guard
on every side lest the Achaeans should attack them before they had
finished. When they had heaped up the barrow they went back again
into the city, and being well assembled they held high feast in the
house of Priam their king. 

Thus, then, did they celebrate the funeral of Hector tamer of horses.

THE END

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright statement:
The Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
World Wide Web presentation is copyright (C) 1994-2000, Daniel
C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
All rights reserved under international and pan-American copyright
conventions, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part
in any form. Direct permission requests to classics@classics.mit.edu.
Translation of "The Deeds of the Divine Augustus" by Augustus is
copyright (C) Thomas Bushnell, BSG.

Provided by The Internet Classics Archive.
See bottom for copyright. Available online at
    http://classics.mit.edu//Homer/odyssey.html

The Odyssey
By Homer


Translated by Samuel Butler

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK I

Tell me, O muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide
after he had sacked the famous town of Troy. Many cities did he visit,
and many were the nations with whose manners and customs he was acquainted;
moreover he suffered much by sea while trying to save his own life
and bring his men safely home; but do what he might he could not save
his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly in eating
the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the god prevented them from
ever reaching home. Tell me, too, about all these things, O daughter
of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them. 

So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely
home except Ulysses, and he, though he was longing to return to his
wife and country, was detained by the goddess Calypso, who had got
him into a large cave and wanted to marry him. But as years went by,
there came a time when the gods settled that he should go back to
Ithaca; even then, however, when he was among his own people, his
troubles were not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had now begun
to pity him except Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing
and would not let him get home. 

Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at the world's
end, and lie in two halves, the one looking West and the other East.
He had gone there to accept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was
enjoying himself at his festival; but the other gods met in the house
of Olympian Jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. At that
moment he was thinking of Aegisthus, who had been killed by Agamemnon's
son Orestes; so he said to the other gods: 

"See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothing
but their own folly. Look at Aegisthus; he must needs make love to
Agamemnon's wife unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he
knew it would be the death of him; for I sent Mercury to warn him
not to do either of these things, inasmuch as Orestes would be sure
to take his revenge when he grew up and wanted to return home. Mercury
told him this in all good will but he would not listen, and now he
has paid for everything in full." 

Then Minerva said, "Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, it served
Aegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as he did;
but Aegisthus is neither here nor there; it is for Ulysses that my
heart bleeds, when I think of his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt
island, far away, poor man, from all his friends. It is an island
covered with forest, in the very middle of the sea, and a goddess
lives there, daughter of the magician Atlas, who looks after the bottom
of the ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earth
asunder. This daughter of Atlas has got hold of poor unhappy Ulysses,
and keeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget
his home, so that he is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how
he may once more see the smoke of his own chimneys. You, sir, take
no heed of this, and yet when Ulysses was before Troy did he not propitiate
you with many a burnt sacrifice? Why then should you keep on being
so angry with him?" 

And Jove said, "My child, what are you talking about? How can I forget
Ulysses than whom there is no more capable man on earth, nor more
liberal in his offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven?
Bear in mind, however, that Neptune is still furious with Ulysses
for having blinded an eye of Polyphemus king of the Cyclopes. Polyphemus
is son to Neptune by the nymph Thoosa, daughter to the sea-king Phorcys;
therefore though he will not kill Ulysses outright, he torments him
by preventing him from getting home. Still, let us lay our heads together
and see how we can help him to return; Neptune will then be pacified,
for if we are all of a mind he can hardly stand out against us."

And Minerva said, "Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, if, then,
the gods now mean that Ulysses should get home, we should first send
Mercury to the Ogygian island to tell Calypso that we have made up
our minds and that he is to return. In the meantime I will go to Ithaca,
to put heart into Ulysses' son Telemachus; I will embolden him to
call the Achaeans in assembly, and speak out to the suitors of his
mother Penelope, who persist in eating up any number of his sheep
and oxen; I will also conduct him to Sparta and to Pylos, to see if
he can hear anything about the return of his dear father- for this
will make people speak well of him." 

So saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable,
with which she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped
the redoubtable bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong,
wherewith she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her,
and down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus, whereon forthwith
she was in Ithaca, at the gateway of Ulysses' house, disguised as
a visitor, Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and she held a bronze spear
in her hand. There she found the lordly suitors seated on hides of
the oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in
front of the house. Men-servants and pages were bustling about to
wait upon them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some
cleaning down the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again,
and some cutting up great quantities of meat. 

Telemachus saw her long before any one else did. He was sitting moodily
among the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how he would
send them flying out of the house, if he were to come to his own again
and be honoured as in days gone by. Thus brooding as he sat among
them, he caught sight of Minerva and went straight to the gate, for
he was vexed that a stranger should be kept waiting for admittance.
He took her right hand in his own, and bade her give him her spear.
"Welcome," said he, "to our house, and when you have partaken of food
you shall tell us what you have come for." 

He led the way as he spoke, and Minerva followed him. When they were
within he took her spear and set it in the spear- stand against a
strong bearing-post along with the many other spears of his unhappy
father, and he conducted her to a richly decorated seat under which
he threw a cloth of damask. There was a footstool also for her feet,
and he set another seat near her for himself, away from the suitors,
that she might not be annoyed while eating by their noise and insolence,
and that he might ask her more freely about his father. 

A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer
and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and
she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them
bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the
house, the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set
cups of gold by their side, and a man-servant brought them wine and
poured it out for them. 

Then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and
seats. Forthwith men servants poured water over their hands, maids
went round with the bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with
wine and water, and they laid their hands upon the good things that
were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink
they wanted music and dancing, which are the crowning embellishments
of a banquet, so a servant brought a lyre to Phemius, whom they compelled
perforce to sing to them. As soon as he touched his lyre and began
to sing Telemachus spoke low to Minerva, with his head close to hers
that no man might hear. 

"I hope, sir," said he, "that you will not be offended with what I
am going to say. Singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it,
and all this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in
some wilderness or grinding to powder in the surf. If these men were
to see my father come back to Ithaca they would pray for longer legs
rather than a longer purse, for money would not serve them; but he,
alas, has fallen on an ill fate, and even when people do sometimes
say that he is coming, we no longer heed them; we shall never see
him again. And now, sir, tell me and tell me true, who you are and
where you come from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner
of ship you came in, how your crew brought you to Ithaca, and of what
nation they declared themselves to be- for you cannot have come by
land. Tell me also truly, for I want to know, are you a stranger to
this house, or have you been here in my father's time? In the old
days we had many visitors for my father went about much himself."

And Minerva answered, "I will tell you truly and particularly all
about it. I am Mentes, son of Anchialus, and I am King of the Taphians.
I have come here with my ship and crew, on a voyage to men of a foreign
tongue being bound for Temesa with a cargo of iron, and I shall bring
back copper. As for my ship, it lies over yonder off the open country
away from the town, in the harbour Rheithron under the wooded mountain
Neritum. Our fathers were friends before us, as old Laertes will tell
you, if you will go and ask him. They say, however, that he never
comes to town now, and lives by himself in the country, faring hardly,
with an old woman to look after him and get his dinner for him, when
he comes in tired from pottering about his vineyard. They told me
your father was at home again, and that was why I came, but it seems
the gods are still keeping him back, for he is not dead yet not on
the mainland. It is more likely he is on some sea-girt island in mid
ocean, or a prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his
will I am no prophet, and know very little about omens, but I speak
as it is borne in upon me from heaven, and assure you that he will
not be away much longer; for he is a man of such resource that even
though he were in chains of iron he would find some means of getting
home again. But tell me, and tell me true, can Ulysses really have
such a fine looking fellow for a son? You are indeed wonderfully like
him about the head and eyes, for we were close friends before he set
sail for Troy where the flower of all the Argives went also. Since
that time we have never either of us seen the other." 

"My mother," answered Telemachus, tells me I am son to Ulysses, but
it is a wise child that knows his own father. Would that I were son
to one who had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask
me, there is no more ill-starred man under heaven than he who they
tell me is my father." 

And Minerva said, "There is no fear of your race dying out yet, while
Penelope has such a fine son as you are. But tell me, and tell me
true, what is the meaning of all this feasting, and who are these
people? What is it all about? Have you some banquet, or is there a
wedding in the family- for no one seems to be bringing any provisions
of his own? And the guests- how atrociously they are behaving; what
riot they make over the whole house; it is enough to disgust any respectable
person who comes near them." 

"Sir," said Telemachus, "as regards your question, so long as my father
was here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in their
displeasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away more
closely than mortal man was ever yet hidden. I could have borne it
better even though he were dead, if he had fallen with his men before
Troy, or had died with friends around him when the days of his fighting
were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his
ashes, and I should myself have been heir to his renown; but now the
storm-winds have spirited him away we know not wither; he is gone
without leaving so much as a trace behind him, and I inherit nothing
but dismay. Nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss
of my father; heaven has laid sorrows upon me of yet another kind;
for the chiefs from all our islands, Dulichium, Same, and the woodland
island of Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself,
are eating up my house under the pretext of paying their court to
my mother, who will neither point blank say that she will not marry,
nor yet bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate,
and before long will do so also with myself." 

"Is that so?" exclaimed Minerva, "then you do indeed want Ulysses
home again. Give him his helmet, shield, and a couple lances, and
if he is the man he was when I first knew him in our house, drinking
and making merry, he would soon lay his hands about these rascally
suitors, were he to stand once more upon his own threshold. He was
then coming from Ephyra, where he had been to beg poison for his arrows
from Ilus, son of Mermerus. Ilus feared the ever-living gods and would
not give him any, but my father let him have some, for he was very
fond of him. If Ulysses is the man he then was these suitors will
have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. 

"But there! It rests with heaven to determine whether he is to return,
and take his revenge in his own house or no; I would, however, urge
you to set about trying to get rid of these suitors at once. Take
my advice, call the Achaean heroes in assembly to-morrow -lay your
case before them, and call heaven to bear you witness. Bid the suitors
take themselves off, each to his own place, and if your mother's mind
is set on marrying again, let her go back to her father, who will
find her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts that
so dear a daughter may expect. As for yourself, let me prevail upon
you to take the best ship you can get, with a crew of twenty men,
and go in quest of your father who has so long been missing. Some
one may tell you something, or (and people often hear things in this
way) some heaven-sent message may direct you. First go to Pylos and
ask Nestor; thence go on to Sparta and visit Menelaus, for he got
home last of all the Achaeans; if you hear that your father is alive
and on his way home, you can put up with the waste these suitors will
make for yet another twelve months. If on the other hand you hear
of his death, come home at once, celebrate his funeral rites with
all due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry
again. Then, having done all this, think it well over in your mind
how, by fair means or foul, you may kill these suitors in your own
house. You are too old to plead infancy any longer; have you not heard
how people are singing Orestes' praises for having killed his father's
murderer Aegisthus? You are a fine, smart looking fellow; show your
mettle, then, and make yourself a name in story. Now, however, I must
go back to my ship and to my crew, who will be impatient if I keep
them waiting longer; think the matter over for yourself, and remember
what I have said to you." 

"Sir," answered Telemachus, "it has been very kind of you to talk
to me in this way, as though I were your own son, and I will do all
you tell me; I know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but
stay a little longer till you have taken a bath and refreshed yourself.
I will then give you a present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing;
I will give you one of great beauty and value- a keepsake such as
only dear friends give to one another." 

Minerva answered, "Do not try to keep me, for I would be on my way
at once. As for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it
till I come again, and I will take it home with me. You shall give
me a very good one, and I will give you one of no less value in return."

With these words she flew away like a bird into the air, but she had
given Telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about
his father. He felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the
stranger had been a god, so he went straight to where the suitors
were sitting. 

Phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as
he told the sad tale of the return from Troy, and the ills Minerva
had laid upon the Achaeans. Penelope, daughter of Icarius, heard his
song from her room upstairs, and came down by the great staircase,
not alone, but attended by two of her handmaids. When she reached
the suitors she stood by one of the bearing posts that supported the
roof of the cloisters with a staid maiden on either side of her. She
held a veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.

"Phemius," she cried, "you know many another feat of gods and heroes,
such as poets love to celebrate. Sing the suitors some one of these,
and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale,
for it breaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds me of my lost husband
whom I mourn ever without ceasing, and whose name was great over all
Hellas and middle Argos." 

"Mother," answered Telemachus, "let the bard sing what he has a mind
to; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is Jove, not they,
who makes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to
his own good pleasure. This fellow means no harm by singing the ill-fated
return of the Danaans, for people always applaud the latest songs
most warmly. Make up your mind to it and bear it; Ulysses is not the
only man who never came back from Troy, but many another went down
as well as he. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your
daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants;
for speech is man's matter, and mine above all others- for it is I
who am master here." 

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son's saying
in her heart. Then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room,
she mourned her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her
eyes. But the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloisters,
and prayed each one that he might be her bed fellow. 

Then Telemachus spoke, "Shameless," he cried, "and insolent suitors,
let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be no brawling, for
it is a rare thing to hear a man with such a divine voice as Phemius
has; but in the morning meet me in full assembly that I may give you
formal notice to depart, and feast at one another's houses, turn and
turn about, at your own cost. If on the other hand you choose to persist
in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with
you in full, and when you fall in my father's house there shall be
no man to avenge you." 

The suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the
boldness of his speech. Then, Antinous, son of Eupeithes, said, "The
gods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may
Jove never grant you to be chief in Ithaca as your father was before
you." 

Telemachus answered, "Antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing,
I will be chief too if I can. Is this the worst fate you can think
of for me? It is no bad thing to be a chief, for it brings both riches
and honour. Still, now that Ulysses is dead there are many great men
in Ithaca both old and young, and some other may take the lead among
them; nevertheless I will be chief in my own house, and will rule
those whom Ulysses has won for me." 

Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered, "It rests with heaven to
decide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your
own house and over your own possessions; no one while there is a man
in Ithaca shall do you violence nor rob you. And now, my good fellow,
I want to know about this stranger. What country does he come from?
Of what family is he, and where is his estate? Has he brought you
news about the return of your father, or was he on business of his
own? He seemed a well-to-do man, but he hurried off so suddenly that
he was gone in a moment before we could get to know him."

"My father is dead and gone," answered Telemachus, "and even if some
rumour reaches me I put no more faith in it now. My mother does indeed
sometimes send for a soothsayer and question him, but I give his prophecyings
no heed. As for the stranger, he was Mentes, son of Anchialus, chief
of the Taphians, an old friend of my father's." But in his heart he
knew that it had been the goddess. 

The suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the evening;
but when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to bed each
in his own abode. Telemachus's room was high up in a tower that looked
on to the outer court; hither, then, he hied, brooding and full of
thought. A good old woman, Euryclea, daughter of Ops, the son of Pisenor,
went before him with a couple of blazing torches. Laertes had bought
her with his own money when she was quite young; he gave the worth
of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to her in his household
as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did not take her to his bed
for he feared his wife's resentment. She it was who now lighted Telemachus
to his room, and she loved him better than any of the other women
in the house did, for she had nursed him when he was a baby. He opened
the door of his bed room and sat down upon the bed; as he took off
his shirt he gave it to the good old woman, who folded it tidily up,
and hung it for him over a peg by his bed side, after which she went
out, pulled the door to by a silver catch, and drew the bolt home
by means of the strap. But Telemachus as he lay covered with a woollen
fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage of the
counsel that Minerva had given him. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK II

Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus
rose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking like
an immortal god. He at once sent the criers round to call the people
in assembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon;
then, when they were got together, he went to the place of assembly
spear in hand- not alone, for his two hounds went with him. Minerva
endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled
at him as he went by, and when he took his place' in his father's
seat even the oldest councillors made way for him. 

Aegyptius, a man bent double with age, and of infinite experience,
the first to speak His son Antiphus had gone with Ulysses to Ilius,
land of noble steeds, but the savage Cyclops had killed him when they
were all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him,
He had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their father's
land, while the third, Eurynomus, was one of the suitors; nevertheless
their father could not get over the loss of Antiphus, and was still
weeping for him when he began his speech. 

"Men of Ithaca," he said, "hear my words. From the day Ulysses left
us there has been no meeting of our councillors until now; who then
can it be, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene
us? Has he got wind of some host approaching, and does he wish to
warn us, or would he speak upon some other matter of public moment?
I am sure he is an excellent person, and I hope Jove will grant him
his heart's desire." 

Telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for
he was bursting with what he had to say. He stood in the middle of
the assembly and the good herald Pisenor brought him his staff. Then,
turning to Aegyptius, "Sir," said he, "it is I, as you will shortly
learn, who have convened you, for it is I who am the most aggrieved.
I have not got wind of any host approaching about which I would warn
you, nor is there any matter of public moment on which I would speak.
My grieveance is purely personal, and turns on two great misfortunes
which have fallen upon my house. The first of these is the loss of
my excellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and
was like a father to every one of you; the second is much more serious,
and ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. The sons of all
the chief men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against
her will. They are afraid to go to her father Icarius, asking him
to choose the one he likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for
his daughter, but day by day they keep hanging about my father's house,
sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and
never giving so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink.
No estate can stand such recklessness; we have now no Ulysses to ward
off harm from our doors, and I cannot hold my own against them. I
shall never all my days be as good a man as he was, still I would
indeed defend myself if I had power to do so, for I cannot stand such
treatment any longer; my house is being disgraced and ruined. Have
respect, therefore, to your own consciences and to public opinion.
Fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lest the gods should be displeased
and turn upon you. I pray you by Jove and Themis, who is the beginning
and the end of councils, [do not] hold back, my friends, and leave
me singlehanded- unless it be that my brave father Ulysses did some
wrong to the Achaeans which you would now avenge on me, by aiding
and abetting these suitors. Moreover, if I am to be eaten out of house
and home at all, I had rather you did the eating yourselves, for I
could then take action against you to some purpose, and serve you
with notices from house to house till I got paid in full, whereas
now I have no remedy." 

With this Telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into
tears. Every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and
no one ventured to make him an angry answer, save only Antinous, who
spoke thus: 

"Telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throw
the blame upon us suitors? It is your mother's fault not ours, for
she is a very artful woman. This three years past, and close on four,
she has been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one
of us, and sending him messages without meaning one word of what she
says. And then there was that other trick she played us. She set up
a great tambour frame in her room, and began to work on an enormous
piece of fine needlework. 'Sweet hearts,' said she, 'Ulysses is indeed
dead, still do not press me to marry again immediately, wait- for
I would not have skill in needlework perish unrecorded- till I have
completed a pall for the hero Laertes, to be in readiness against
the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women
of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.'

"This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her
working on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick
the stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three
years and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was
now in her fourth year, one of her maids who knew what she was doing
told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she
had to finish it whether she would or no. The suitors, therefore,
make you this answer, that both you and the Achaeans may understand-'Send
your mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her
father's choice'; for I do not know what will happen if she goes on
plaguing us much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score
of the accomplishments Minerva has taught her, and because she is
so clever. We never yet heard of such a woman; we know all about Tyro,
Alcmena, Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing
to your mother, any one of them. It was not fair of her to treat us
in that way, and as long as she continues in the mind with which heaven
has now endowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your estate;
and I do not see why she should change, for she gets all the honour
and glory, and it is you who pay for it, not she. Understand, then,
that we will not go back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere,
till she has made her choice and married some one or other of us."

Telemachus answered, "Antinous, how can I drive the mother who bore
me from my father's house? My father is abroad and we do not know
whether he is alive or dead. It will be hard on me if I have to pay
Icarius the large sum which I must give him if I insist on sending
his daughter back to him. Not only will he deal rigorously with me,
but heaven will also punish me; for my mother when she leaves the
house will calf on the Erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not
be a creditable thing to do, and I will have nothing to say to it.
If you choose to take offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere
at one another's houses at your own cost turn and turn about. If,
on the other hand, you elect to persist in spunging upon one man,
heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with you in full, and when you
fall in my father's house there shall be no man to avenge you."

As he spoke Jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and
they flew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own
lordly flight. When they were right over the middle of the assembly
they wheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and
glaring death into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting
fiercely and tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right
over the town. The people wondered as they saw them, and asked each
other what an this might be; whereon Halitherses, who was the best
prophet and reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and
in all honesty, saying: 

"Hear me, men of Ithaca, and I speak more particularly to the suitors,
for I see mischief brewing for them. Ulysses is not going to be away
much longer; indeed he is close at hand to deal out death and destruction,
not on them alone, but on many another of us who live in Ithaca. Let
us then be wise in time, and put a stop to this wickedness before
he comes. Let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will be better
for them, for I am not prophesying without due knowledge; everything
has happened to Ulysses as I foretold when the Argives set out for
Troy, and he with them. I said that after going through much hardship
and losing all his men he should come home again in the twentieth
year and that no one would know him; and now all this is coming true."

Eurymachus son of Polybus then said, "Go home, old man, and prophesy
to your own children, or it may be worse for them. I can read these
omens myself much better than you can; birds are always flying about
in the sunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything.
Ulysses has died in a far country, and it is a pity you are not dead
along with him, instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel
to the anger of Telemachus which is fierce enough as it is. I suppose
you think he will give you something for your family, but I tell you-
and it shall surely be- when an old man like you, who should know
better, talks a young one over till he becomes troublesome, in the
first place his young friend will only fare so much the worse- he
will take nothing by it, for the suitors will prevent this- and in
the next, we will lay a heavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you
will at all like paying, for it will bear hardly upon you. As for
Telemachus, I warn him in the presence of you all to send his mother
back to her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with
all the marriage gifts so dear a daughter may expect. Till we shall
go on harassing him with our suit; for we fear no man, and care neither
for him, with all his fine speeches, nor for any fortune-telling of
yours. You may preach as much as you please, but we shall only hate
you the more. We shall go back and continue to eat up Telemachus's
estate without paying him, till such time as his mother leaves off
tormenting us by keeping us day after day on the tiptoe of expectation,
each vying with the other in his suit for a prize of such rare perfection.
Besides we cannot go after the other women whom we should marry in
due course, but for the way in which she treats us." 

Then Telemachus said, "Eurymachus, and you other suitors, I shall
say no more, and entreat you no further, for the gods and the people
of Ithaca now know my story. Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twenty
men to take me hither and thither, and I will go to Sparta and to
Pylos in quest of my father who has so long been missing. Some one
may tell me something, or (and people often hear things in this way)
some heaven-sent message may direct me. If I can hear of him as alive
and on his way home I will put up with the waste you suitors will
make for yet another twelve months. If on the other hand I hear of
his death, I will return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with
all due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make my mother marry
again." 

With these words he sat down, and Mentor who had been a friend of
Ulysses, and had been left in charge of everything with full authority
over the servants, rose to speak. He, then, plainly and in all honesty
addressed them thus: 

"Hear me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may never have a kind and
well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably;
I hope that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust,
for there is not one of you but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled you
as though he were your father. I am not half so angry with the suitors,
for if they choose to do violence in the naughtiness of their hearts,
and wager their heads that Ulysses will not return, they can take
the high hand and eat up his estate, but as for you others I am shocked
at the way in which you all sit still without even trying to stop
such scandalous goings on-which you could do if you chose, for you
are many and they are few." 

Leiocritus, son of Evenor, answered him saying, "Mentor, what folly
is all this, that you should set the people to stay us? It is a hard
thing for one man to fight with many about his victuals. Even though
Ulysses himself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house,
and do his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly,
would have small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon
his own head if he fought against such great odds. There is no sense
in what you have been saying. Now, therefore, do you people go about
your business, and let his father's old friends, Mentor and Halitherses,
speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at all- which I do not think
he will, for he is more likely to stay where he is till some one comes
and tells him something." 

On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
abode, while the suitors returned to the house of Ulysses.

Then Telemachus went all alone by the sea side, washed his hands in
the grey waves, and prayed to Minerva. 

"Hear me," he cried, "you god who visited me yesterday, and bade me
sail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing.
I would obey you, but the Achaeans, and more particularly the wicked
suitors, are hindering me that I cannot do so." 

As he thus prayed, Minerva came close up to him in the likeness and
with the voice of Mentor. "Telemachus," said she, "if you are made
of the same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward
henceforward, for Ulysses never broke his word nor left his work half
done. If, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless,
but unless you have the blood of Ulysses and of Penelope in your veins
I see no likelihood of your succeeding. Sons are seldom as good men
as their fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as
you are not going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are
not entirely without some share of your father's wise discernment,
I look with hope upon your undertaking. But mind you never make common
cause with any of those foolish suitors, for they have neither sense
nor virtue, and give no thought to death and to the doom that will
shortly fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on
the same day. As for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your
father was such an old friend of mine that I will find you a ship,
and will come with you myself. Now, however, return home, and go about
among the suitors; begin getting provisions ready for your voyage;
see everything well stowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal,
which is the staff of life, in leathern bags, while I go round the
town and beat up volunteers at once. There are many ships in Ithaca
both old and new; I will run my eye over them for you and will choose
the best; we will get her ready and will put out to sea without delay."

Thus spoke Minerva daughter of Jove, and Telemachus lost no time in
doing as the goddess told him. He went moodily and found the suitors
flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court. Antinous came
up to him at once and laughed as he took his hand in his own, saying,
"Telemachus, my fine fire-eater, bear no more ill blood neither in
word nor deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do. The Achaeans
will find you in everything- a ship and a picked crew to boot- so
that you can set sail for Pylos at once and get news of your noble
father." 

"Antinous," answered Telemachus, "I cannot eat in peace, nor take
pleasure of any kind with such men as you are. Was it not enough that
you should waste so much good property of mine while I was yet a boy?
Now that I am older and know more about it, I am also stronger, and
whether here among this people, or by going to Pylos, I will do you
all the harm I can. I shall go, and my going will not be in vain though,
thanks to you suitors, I have neither ship nor crew of my own, and
must be passenger not captain." 

As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of Antinous. Meanwhile
the others went on getting dinner ready about the buildings, jeering
at him tauntingly as they did so. 

"Telemachus," said one youngster, "means to be the death of us; I
suppose he thinks he can bring friends to help him from Pylos, or
again from Sparta, where he seems bent on going. Or will he go to
Ephyra as well, for poison to put in our wine and kill us?"

Another said, "Perhaps if Telemachus goes on board ship, he will be
like his father and perish far from his friends. In this case we should
have plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property amongst
us: as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries
her have that." 

This was how they talked. But Telemachus went down into the lofty
and spacious store-room where his father's treasure of gold and bronze
lay heaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes
were kept in open chests. Here, too, there was a store of fragrant
olive oil, while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit
for a god to drink, were ranged against the wall in case Ulysses should
come home again after all. The room was closed with well-made doors
opening in the middle; moreover the faithful old house-keeper Euryclea,
daughter of Ops the son of Pisenor, was in charge of everything both
night and day. Telemachus called her to the store-room and said:

"Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you have, after what you
are keeping for my father's own drinking, in case, poor man, he should
escape death, and find his way home again after all. Let me have twelve
jars, and see that they all have lids; also fill me some well-sewn
leathern bags with barley meal- about twenty measures in all. Get
these things put together at once, and say nothing about it. I will
take everything away this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs
for the night. I am going to Sparta and to Pylos to see if I can hear
anything about the return of my dear father. 

When Euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him,
saying, "My dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that
into your head? Where in the world do you want to go to- you, who
are the one hope of the house? Your poor father is dead and gone in
some foreign country nobody knows where, and as soon as your back
is turned these wicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out
of the way, and will share all your possessions among themselves;
stay where you are among your own people, and do not go wandering
and worrying your life out on the barren ocean." 

"Fear not, nurse," answered Telemachus, "my scheme is not without
heaven's sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all this
to my mother, till I have been away some ten or twelve days, unless
she hears of my having gone, and asks you; for I do not want her to
spoil her beauty by crying." 

The old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she
had completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars,
and getting the barley meal into the bags, while Telemachus went back
to the suitors. 

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. She took his shape,
and went round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet
at the ship by sundown. She went also to Noemon son of Phronius, and
asked him to let her have a ship- which he was very ready to do. When
the sun had set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship
into the water, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally
carry, and stationed her at the end of the harbour. Presently the
crew came up, and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them.

Furthermore she went to the house of Ulysses, and threw the suitors
into a deep slumber. She caused their drink to fuddle them, and made
them drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of sitting
over their wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their
eyes heavy and full of drowsiness. Then she took the form and voice
of Mentor, and called Telemachus to come outside. 

"Telemachus," said she, "the men are on board and at their oars, waiting
for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off."

On this she led the way, while Telemachus followed in her steps. When
they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side,
and Telemachus said, "Now my men, help me to get the stores on board;
they are all put together in the cloister, and my mother does not
know anything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one."

With these words he led the way and the others followed after. When
they had brought the things as he told them, Telemachus went on board,
Minerva going before him and taking her seat in the stern of the vessel,
while Telemachus sat beside her. Then the men loosed the hawsers and
took their places on the benches. Minerva sent them a fair wind from
the West, that whistled over the deep blue waves whereon Telemachus
told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and they did
as he told them. They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank,
raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then they hoisted
their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide. As the sail
bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the deep blue water,
and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. Then they
made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing-bowls to the
brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from
everlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove.

Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night
from dark till dawn. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK III

But as the sun was rising from the fair sea into the firmament of
heaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos
the city of Neleus. Now the people of Pylos were gathered on the sea
shore to offer sacrifice of black bulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake.
There were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were
nine bulls to each guild. As they were eating the inward meats and
burning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of Neptune, Telemachus
and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their ship to anchor,
and went ashore. 

Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her. Presently she said,
"Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have
taken this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried
and how he came by his end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may
see what he has got to tell us. Beg of him to speak the truth, and
he will tell no lies, for he is an excellent person." 

"But how, Mentor," replied Telemachus, "dare I go up to Nestor, and
how am I to address him? I have never yet been used to holding long
conversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one
who is so much older than myself." 

"Some things, Telemachus," answered Minerva, "will be suggested to
you by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for
I am assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your
birth until now." 

She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps till
they reached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people were
assembled. There they found Nestor sitting with his sons, while his
company round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces
of meat on to the spits while other pieces were cooking. When they
saw the strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and
bade them take their places. Nestor's son Pisistratus at once offered
his hand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins
that were lying on the sands near his father and his brother Thrasymedes.
Then he gave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine
for them into a golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting
her at the same time. 

"Offer a prayer, sir," said he, "to King Neptune, for it is his feast
that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink-offering,
pass the cup to your friend that he may do so also. I doubt not that
he too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without God
in the world. Still he is younger than you are, and is much of an
age with myself, so I he handed I will give you the precedence."

As he spoke he handed her the cup. Minerva thought it very right and
proper of him to have given it to herself first; she accordingly began
praying heartily to Neptune. "O thou," she cried, "that encirclest
the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants that call
upon thee. More especially we pray thee send down thy grace on Nestor
and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the Pylian people
some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering you.
Lastly, grant Telemachus and myself a happy issue, in respect of the
matter that has brought us in our to Pylos." 

When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to Telemachus
and he prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer meats were roasted
and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man his portion
and they all made an excellent dinner. As soon as they had had enough
to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak.

"Now," said he, "that our guests have done their dinner, it will be
best to ask them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are you,
and from what port have you sailed? Are you traders? or do you sail
the seas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man's
hand against you?" 

Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to ask
about his father and get himself a good name. 

"Nestor," said he, "son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, you
ask whence we come, and I will tell you. We come from Ithaca under
Neritum, and the matter about which I would speak is of private not
public import. I seek news of my unhappy father Ulysses, who is said
to have sacked the town of Troy in company with yourself. We know
what fate befell each one of the other heroes who fought at Troy,
but as regards Ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even
that he is dead at all, for no one can certify us in what place he
perished, nor say whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was
lost at sea amid the waves of Amphitrite. Therefore I am suppliant
at your knees, if haply you may be pleased to tell me of his melancholy
end, whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some
other traveller, for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things
out of any pity for me, but tell me in all plainness exactly what
you saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service, either
by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed among the Trojans,
bear it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all."

"My friend," answered Nestor, "you recall a time of much sorrow to
my mind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, while privateering
under Achilles, and when fighting before the great city of king Priam.
Our best men all of them fell there- Ajax, Achilles, Patroclus peer
of gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilochus, a man singularly
fleet of foot and in fight valiant. But we suffered much more than
this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story? Though
you were to stay here and question me for five years, or even six,
I could not tell you all that the Achaeans suffered, and you would
turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. Nine long years did
we try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against
us; during all this time there was no one who could compare with your
father in subtlety- if indeed you are his son- I can hardly believe
my eyes- and you talk just like him too- no one would say that people
of such different ages could speak so much alike. He and I never had
any kind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council,
but in singleness of heart and purpose we advised the Argives how
all might be ordered for the best. 

"When however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sail
in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex
the Argives on their homeward voyage; for they had Not all been either
wise or understanding, and hence many came to a bad end through the
displeasure of Jove's daughter Minerva, who brought about a quarrel
between the two sons of Atreus. 

"The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be,
for it was sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine. When they
explained why they had called- the people together, it seemed that
Menelaus was for sailing homeward at once, and this displeased Agamemnon,
who thought that we should wait till we had offered hecatombs to appease
the anger of Minerva. Fool that he was, he might have known that he
would not prevail with her, for when the gods have made up their minds
they do not change them lightly. So the two stood bandying hard words,
whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with a cry that rent the
air, and were of two minds as to what they should do. 

"That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatching
mischief against us. But in the morning some of us drew our ships
into the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the
rest, about half in number, stayed behind with Agamemnon. We- the
other half- embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven
had smoothed the sea. When we reached Tenedos we offered sacrifices
to the gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel Jove, however,
did not yet mean that we should do so, and raised a second quarrel
in the course of which some among us turned their ships back again,
and sailed away under Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon;
but I, and all the ships that were with me pressed forward, for I
saw that mischief was brewing. The son of Tydeus went on also with
me, and his crews with him. Later on Menelaus joined us at Lesbos,
and found us making up our minds about our course- for we did not
know whether to go outside Chios by the island of Psyra, keeping this
to our left, or inside Chios, over against the stormy headland of
Mimas. So we asked heaven for a sign, and were shown one to the effect
that we should be soonest out of danger if we headed our ships across
the open sea to Euboea. This we therefore did, and a fair wind sprang
up which gave us a quick passage during the night to Geraestus, where
we offered many sacrifices to Neptune for having helped us so far
on our way. Four days later Diomed and his men stationed their ships
in Argos, but I held on for Pylos, and the wind never fell light from
the day when heaven first made it fair for me. 

"Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anything
about the others. I know neither who got home safely nor who were
lost but, as in duty bound, I will give you without reserve the reports
that have reached me since I have been here in my own house. They
say the Myrmidons returned home safely under Achilles' son Neoptolemus;
so also did the valiant son of Poias, Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again,
lost no men at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the
field got safe home with him to Crete. No matter how far out of the
world you live, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he
came to at the hands of Aegisthus- and a fearful reckoning did Aegisthus
presently pay. See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a son
behind him to do as Orestes did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer
of his noble father. You too, then- for you are a tall, smart-looking
fellow- show your mettle and make yourself a name in story."

"Nestor son of Neleus," answered Telemachus, "honour to the Achaean
name, the Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through
all time for he has avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might
grant me to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors,
who are ill treating me and plotting my ruin; but the gods have no
such happiness in store for me and for my father, so we must bear
it as best we may." 

"My friend," said Nestor, "now that you remind me, I remember to have
heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards
you and are making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this tamely,
or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you? Who knows
but what Ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels
in full, either single-handed or with a force of Achaeans behind him?
If Minerva were to take as great a liking to you as she did to Ulysses
when we were fighting before Troy (for I never yet saw the gods so
openly fond of any one as Minerva then was of your father), if she
would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers would
soon some of them him, forget their wooing." 

Telemachus answered, "I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be
far too much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of it. Even
though the gods themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall
me." 

On this Minerva said, "Telemachus, what are you talking about? Heaven
has a long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, I
should not care how much I suffered before getting home, provided
I could be safe when I was once there. I would rather this, than get
home quickly, and then be killed in my own house as Agamemnon was
by the treachery of Aegisthus and his wife. Still, death is certain,
and when a man's hour is come, not even the gods can save him, no
matter how fond they are of him." 

"Mentor," answered Telemachus, "do not let us talk about it any more.
There is no chance of my father's ever coming back; the gods have
long since counselled his destruction. There is something else, however,
about which I should like to ask Nestor, for he knows much more than
any one else does. They say he has reigned for three generations so
that it is like talking to an immortal. Tell me, therefore, Nestor,
and tell me true; how did Agamemnon come to die in that way? What
was Menelaus doing? And how came false Aegisthus to kill so far better
a man than himself? Was Menelaus away from Achaean Argos, voyaging
elsewhither among mankind, that Aegisthus took heart and killed Agamemnon?"

"I will tell you truly," answered Nestor, "and indeed you have yourself
divined how it all happened. If Menelaus when he got back from Troy
had found Aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been
no barrow heaped up for him, not even when he was dead, but he would
have been thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not a
woman would have mourned him, for he had done a deed of great wickedness;
but we were over there, fighting hard at Troy, and Aegisthus who was
taking his ease quietly in the heart of Argos, cajoled Agamemnon's
wife Clytemnestra with incessant flattery. 

"At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for
she was of a good natural disposition; moreover there was a bard with
her, to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for
Troy, that he was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had
counselled her destruction, Aegisthus thus this bard off to a desert
island and left him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon- after
which she went willingly enough to the house of Aegisthus. Then he
offered many burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples
with tapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond his expectations.

"Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good
terms with one another. When we got to Sunium, which is the point
of Athens, Apollo with his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman
of Menelaus' ship (and never man knew better how to handle a vessel
in rough weather) so that he died then and there with the helm in
his hand, and Menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had
to wait in order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral
rites. Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and had sailed
on as far as the Malean heads, Jove counselled evil against him and
made it it blow hard till the waves ran mountains high. Here he divided
his fleet and took the one half towards Crete where the Cydonians
dwell round about the waters of the river Iardanus. There is a high
headland hereabouts stretching out into the sea from a place called
Gortyn, and all along this part of the coast as far as Phaestus the
sea runs high when there is a south wind blowing, but arter Phaestus
the coast is more protected, for a small headland can make a great
shelter. Here this part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and
wrecked; but the crews just managed to save themselves. As for the
other five ships, they were taken by winds and seas to Egypt, where
Menelaus gathered much gold and substance among people of an alien
speech. Meanwhile Aegisthus here at home plotted his evil deed. For
seven years after he had killed Agamemnon he ruled in Mycene, and
the people were obedient under him, but in the eighth year Orestes
came back from Athens to be his bane, and killed the murderer of his
father. Then he celebrated the funeral rites of his mother and of
false Aegisthus by a banquet to the people of Argos, and on that very
day Menelaus came home, with as much treasure as his ships could carry.

"Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far
from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your
house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will
have been on a fool's errand. Still, I should advise you by all means
to go and visit Menelaus, who has lately come off a voyage among such
distant peoples as no man could ever hope to get back from, when the
winds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds
cannot fly the distance in a twelvemonth, so vast and terrible are
the seas that they must cross. Go to him, therefore, by sea, and take
your own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can
have a chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can
escort you to Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives. Beg of him to speak
the truth, and he will tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person."

As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said,
"Sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues
of the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings
to Neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is
bed time. People should go away early and not keep late hours at a
religious festival." 

Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying. Men servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the
mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering; then they threw the tongues of the victims
into the fire, and stood up to make their drink-offerings. When they
had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded,
Minerva and Telemachus were forgoing on board their ship, but Nestor
caught them up at once and stayed them. 

"Heaven and the immortal gods," he exclaimed, "forbid that you should
leave my house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I am so poor
and short of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable
to find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? Let me
tell you I have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit
the son of my old friend Ulysses to camp down on the deck of a ship-
not while I live- nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep
open house as have done." 

Then Minerva answered, "Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be
much better that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore,
shall return with you and sleep at your house, but I must go back
to give orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. I am the only
older person among them; the rest are all young men of Telemachus'
own age, who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so I must return
to the ship and sleep there. Moreover to-morrow I must go to the Cauconians
where I have a large sum of money long owing to me. As for Telemachus,
now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in a chariot, and
let one of your sons go with him. Be pleased also to provide him with
your best and fleetest horses." 

When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and
all marvelled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished, and took Telemachus
by the hand. "My friend," said he, "I see that you are going to be
a great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while you
are still so young. This can have been none other of those who dwell
in heaven than Jove's redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, who showed
such favour towards your brave father among the Argives." "Holy queen,"
he continued, "vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my good
wife, and my children. In return, I will offer you in sacrifice a
broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought
by man under the yoke. I will gild her horns, and will offer her up
to you in sacrifice." 

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer. He then led the way
to his own house, followed by his sons and sons-in-law. When they
had got there and had taken their places on the benches and seats,
he mixed them a bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when
the housekeeper took the lid off the jar that held it. As he mixed
the wine, he prayed much and made drink-offerings to Minerva, daughter
of Aegis-bearing Jove. Then, when they had made their drink-offerings
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the others went home
to bed each in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in
the room that was over the gateway along with Pisistratus, who was
the only unmarried son now left him. As for himself, he slept in an
inner room of the house, with the queen his wife by his side.

Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Nestor
left his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished
marble that stood in front of his house. Here aforetime sat Neleus,
peer of gods in counsel, but he was now dead, and had gone to the
house of Hades; so Nestor sat in his seat, sceptre in hand, as guardian
of the public weal. His sons as they left their rooms gathered round
him, Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymedes; the sixth
son was Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined them they made him
sit with them. Nestor then addressed them. 

"My sons," said he, "make haste to do as I shall bid you. I wish first
and foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifested
herself visibly to me during yesterday's festivities. Go, then, one
or other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer,
and come on here with it at once. Another must go to Telemachus's
ship, and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the
vessel. Some one else will run and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to
gild the horns of the heifer. The rest, stay all of you where you
are; tell the maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and
to fetch seats, and logs of wood for a burnt offering. Tell them also-
to bring me some clear spring water." 

On this they hurried off on their several errands. The heifer was
brought in from the plain, and Telemachus's crew came from the ship;
the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he
worked his gold, and Minerva herself came to the sacrifice. Nestor
gave out the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer that
the goddess might have pleasure in their beauty. Then Stratius and
Echephron brought her in by the horns; Aretus fetched water from the
house in a ewer that had a flower pattern on it, and in his other
hand he held a basket of barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood by
with a sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while Perseus held a
bucket. Then Nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the
barley meal, and he offered many a prayer to Minerva as he threw a
lock from the heifer's head upon the fire. 

When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal Thrasymedes
dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with a stroke that cut
through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the daughters
and daughters-in-law of Nestor, and his venerable wife Eurydice (she
was eldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed with delight. Then they
lifted the heifer's head from off the ground, and Pisistratus cut
her throat. When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut
her up. They cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them
round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the
top of them; then Nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine
over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits
in their hands. When the thighs were burned and they had tasted the
inward meats, they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces
on the spits and toasted them over the fire. 

Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor's youngest daughter, washed Telemachus.
When she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she brought him
a fair mantle and shirt, and he looked like a god as he came from
the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor. When the outer meats
were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to dinner where
they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept pouring them
out their wine in cups of gold. As soon as they had had had enough
to eat and drink Nestor said, "Sons, put Telemachus's horses to the
chariot that he may start at once." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the
fleet horses to the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up a provision
of bread, wine, and sweetmeats fit for the sons of princes. Then Telemachus
got into the chariot, while Pisistratus gathered up the reins and
took his seat beside him. He lashed the horses on and they flew forward
nothing loth into the open country, leaving the high citadel of Pylos
behind them. All that day did they travel, swaying the yoke upon their
necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all the land. Then
they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son to Ortilochus
and grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night and Diocles entertained
them hospitably. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn; appeared,
they again yoked their horses and drove out through the gateway under
the echoing gatehouse. Pisistratus lashed the horses on and they flew
forward nothing loth; presently they came to the corn lands Of the
open country, and in the course of time completed their journey, so
well did their steeds take them. 

Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IV

They reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon them where they drove
straight to the of abode Menelaus [and found him in his own house,
feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son,
and also of his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of that
valiant warrior Achilles. He had given his consent and promised her
to him while he was still at Troy, and now the gods were bringing
the marriage about; so he was sending her with chariots and horses
to the city of the Myrmidons over whom Achilles' son was reigning.
For his only son he had found a bride from Sparta, daughter of Alector.
This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, for heaven
vouchsafed Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who
was fair as golden Venus herself. 

So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and making
merry in his house. There was a bard also to sing to them and play
his lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of
them when the man struck up with his tune.] 

Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate,
whereon Eteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he saw
them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his Master. He went
close up to him and said, "Menelaus, there are some strangers come
here, two men, who look like sons of Jove. What are we to do? Shall
we take their horses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as
they best can?" 

Menelaus was very angry and said, "Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you
never used to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton. Take their
horses out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have
supper; you and I have stayed often enough at other people's houses
before we got back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace
henceforward." 

So Eteoneus bustled back and bade other servants come with him. They
took their sweating hands from under the yoke, made them fast to the
mangers, and gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then they
leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led
the way into the house. Telemachus and Pisistratus were astonished
when they saw it, for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon;
then, when they had admired everything to their heart's content, they
went into the bath room and washed themselves. 

When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they
brought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats
by the side of Menelaus. A maidservant brought them water in a beautiful
golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their
hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought
them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in
the house, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats
and set cups of gold by their side. 

Menelaus then greeted them saying, "Fall to, and welcome; when you
have done supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such
men as you cannot have been lost. You must be descended from a line
of sceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as
you are." 

On this he handed them a piece of fat roast loin, which had been set
near him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the good
things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat
and drink, Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so
close that no one might hear, "Look, Pisistratus, man after my own
heart, see the gleam of bronze and gold- of amber, ivory, and silver.
Everything is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian
Jove. I am lost in admiration." 

Menelaus overheard him and said, "No one, my sons, can hold his own
with Jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but
among mortal men- well, there may be another who has as much wealth
as I have, or there may not; but at all events I have travelled much
and have undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before
I could get home with my fleet. I went to Cyprus, Phoenicia and the
Egyptians; I went also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and the Erembians,
and to Libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are born,
and the sheep lamb down three times a year. Every one in that country,
whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good milk,
for the ewes yield all the year round. But while I was travelling
and getting great riches among these people, my brother was secretly
and shockingly murdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so
that I have no pleasure in being lord of all this wealth. Whoever
your parents may be they must have told you about all this, and of
my heavy loss in the ruin of a stately mansion fully and magnificently
furnished. Would that I had only a third of what I now have so that
I had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the
plain of Troy, far from Argos. I of grieve, as I sit here in my house,
for one and all of them. At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently
I leave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of
it. Yet grieve for these as I may, I do so for one man more than for
them all. I cannot even think of him without loathing both food and
sleep, so miserable does he make me, for no one of all the Achaeans
worked so hard or risked so much as he did. He took nothing by it,
and has left a legacy of sorrow to myself, for he has been gone a
long time, and we know not whether he is alive or dead. His old father,
his long-suffering wife Penelope, and his son Telemachus, whom he
left behind him an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account."

Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as he bethought
him of his father. Tears fell from his eyes as he heard him thus mentioned,
so that he held his cloak before his face with both hands. When Menelaus
saw this he doubted whether to let him choose his own time for speaking,
or to ask him at once and find what it was all about. 

While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaulted
and perfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself. Adraste brought
her a seat, Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her the
silver work-box which Alcandra wife of Polybus had given her. Polybus
lived in Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world;
he gave Menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and
ten talents of gold; besides all this, his wife gave Helen some beautiful
presents, to wit, a golden distaff, and a silver work-box that ran
on wheels, with a gold band round the top of it. Phylo now placed
this by her side, full of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with
violet coloured wool was laid upon the top of it. Then Helen took
her seat, put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her
husband. 

"Do we know, Menelaus," said she, "the names of these strangers who
have come to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong?-but I cannot
help saying what I think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman
so like somebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what
to think) as this young man is like Telemachus, whom Ulysses left
as a baby behind him, when you Achaeans went to Troy with battle in
your hearts, on account of my most shameless self." 

"My dear wife," replied Menelaus, "I see the likeness just as you
do. His hands and feet are just like Ulysses'; so is his hair, with
the shape of his head and the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when
I was talking about Ulysses, and saying how much he had suffered on
my account, tears fell from his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle."

Then Pisistratus said, "Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right in
thinking that this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest,
and is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one
whose conversation is so divinely interesting as your own. My father,
Nestor, sent me to escort him hither, for he wanted to know whether
you could give him any counsel or suggestion. A son has always trouble
at home when his father has gone away leaving him without supporters;
and this is how Telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent,
and there is no one among his own people to stand by him."

"Bless my heart," replied Menelaus, "then I am receiving a visit from
the son of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake.
I had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when
heaven had granted us a safe return from beyond the seas. I should
have founded a city for him in Argos, and built him a house. I should
have made him leave Ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people,
and should have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities
that are subject to me. We should thus have seen one another continually,
and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy an
intercourse. I suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great
good fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting
home at all." 

Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping. Helen wept,
Telemachus wept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep his
eyes from filling, when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus
whom the son of bright Dawn had killed. Thereon he said to Menelaus,

"Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told
me you were a person of rare and excellent understanding. If, then,
it be possible, do as I would urge you. I am not fond of crying while
I am getting my supper. Morning will come in due course, and in the
forenoon I care not how much I cry for those that are dead and gone.
This is all we can do for the poor things. We can only shave our heads
for them and wring the tears from our cheeks. I had a brother who
died at Troy; he was by no means the worst man there; you are sure
to have known him- his name was Antilochus; I never set eyes upon
him myself, but they say that he was singularly fleet of foot and
in fight valiant." 

"Your discretion, my friend," answered Menelaus, "is beyond your years.
It is plain you take after your father. One can soon see when a man
is son to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and offspring-
and it has blessed Nestor from first to last all his days, giving
him a green old age in his own house, with sons about him who are
both we disposed and valiant. We will put an end therefore to all
this weeping, and attend to our supper again. Let water be poured
over our hands. Telemachus and I can talk with one another fully in
the morning." 

On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands
and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.

Then Jove's daughter Helen bethought her of another matter. She drugged
the wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour.
Whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the
rest of the day, not even though his father and mother both of them
drop down dead, or he sees a brother or a son hewn in pieces before
his very eyes. This drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had
been given to Helen by Polydamna wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt, where
there grow all sorts of herbs, some good to put into the mixing-bowl
and others poisonous. Moreover, every one in the whole country is
a skilled physician, for they are of the race of Paeeon. When Helen
had put this drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve
the wine round, she said: 

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable
men (which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and
evil, and can do what he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen
while I tell you a tale in season. I cannot indeed name every single
one of the exploits of Ulysses, but I can say what he did when he
was before Troy, and you Achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties.
He covered himself with wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in
rags, and entered the enemy's city looking like a menial or a beggar.
and quite different from what he did when he was among his own people.
In this disguise he entered the city of Troy, and no one said anything
to him. I alone recognized him and began to question him, but he was
too cunning for me. When, however, I had washed and anointed him and
had given him clothes, and after I had sworn a solemn oath not to
betray him to the Trojans till he had got safely back to his own camp
and to the ships, he told me all that the Achaeans meant to do. He
killed many Trojans and got much information before he reached the
Argive camp, for all which things the Trojan women made lamentation,
but for my own part I was glad, for my heart was beginning to oam
after my home, and I was unhappy about wrong that Venus had done me
in taking me over there, away from my country, my girl, and my lawful
wedded husband, who is indeed by no means deficient either in person
or understanding." 

Then Menelaus said, "All that you have been saying, my dear wife,
is true. I have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes,
but I have never seen such another man as Ulysses. What endurance
too, and what courage he displayed within the wooden horse, wherein
all the bravest of the Argives were lying in wait to bring death and
destruction upon the Trojans. At that moment you came up to us; some
god who wished well to the Trojans must have set you on to it and
you had Deiphobus with you. Three times did you go all round our hiding
place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and
mimicked all our wives -Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats inside
heard what a noise you made. Diomed and I could not make up our minds
whether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside,
but Ulysses held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except
Anticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when Ulysses clapped his
two brawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there. It was this
that saved us all, for he muzzled Anticlus till Minerva took you away
again." 

"How sad," exclaimed Telemachus, "that all this was of no avail to
save him, nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be pleased to
send us all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon
of sleep." 

On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that
was in the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread
coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to
wear. So the maids went out, carrying a torch, and made the beds,
to which a man-servant presently conducted the strangers. Thus, then,
did Telemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while
the son of Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen by his side.

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Menelaus
rose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
girded his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like
an immortal god. Then, taking a seat near Telemachus he said:

"And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage to
Lacedaemon? Are you on public or private business? Tell me all about
it." 

"I have come, sir replied Telemachus, "to see if you can tell me anything
about my father. I am being eaten out of house and home; my fair estate
is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who keep killing
great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of paying their
addresses to my mother. Therefore, I am suppliant at your knees if
haply you may tell me about my father's melancholy end, whether you
saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller;
for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any
pity for myself, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw.
If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service either by word
or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans, bear it in
mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all." 

Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. "So," he exclaimed,
"these cowards would usurp a brave man's bed? A hind might as well
lay her new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed
in the forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back
to his lair will make short work with the pair of them- and so will
Ulysses with these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if
Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides
in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans cheered
him- if he is still such and were to come near these suitors, they
would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your questions,
however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you
without concealment all that the old man of the sea told me.

"I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt,
for my hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods
are very strict about having their dues. Now off Egypt, about as far
as a ship can sail in a day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there
is an island called Pharos- it has a good harbour from which vessels
can get out into open sea when they have taken in water- and the gods
becalmed me twenty days without so much as a breath of fair wind to
help me forward. We should have run clean out of provisions and my
men would have starved, if a goddess had not taken pity upon me and
saved me in the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus, the old man
of the sea, for she had taken a great fancy to me. 

"She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for
the men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in
the hope of catching a fish or two to save them from the pangs of
hunger. 'Stranger,' said she, 'it seems to me that you like starving
in this way- at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you
stick here day after day, without even trying to get away though your
men are dying by inches.' 

"'Let me tell you,' said I, 'whichever of the goddesses you may happen
to be, that I am not staying here of my own accord, but must have
offended the gods that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for the
gods know everything. which of the immortals it is that is hindering
me in this way, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach
my home.' 

"'Stranger,' replied she, 'I will make it all quite clear to you.
There is an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts and whose
name is Proteus. He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father;
he is Neptune's head man and knows every inch of ground all over the
bottom of the sea. If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will
tell you about your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how
you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home. He will also tell
you, if you so will, all that has been going on at your house both
good and bad, while you have been away on your long and dangerous
journey.' 

"'Can you show me,' said I, 'some stratagem by means of which I may
catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding me out? For
a god is not easily caught- not by a mortal man.' 

"'Stranger,' said she, 'I will make it all quite clear to you. About
the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of
the sea comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that
furs the water over his head. As soon as he has come up he lies down,
and goes to sleep in a great sea cave, where the seals- Halosydne's
chickens as they call them- come up also from the grey sea, and go
to sleep in shoals all round him; and a very strong and fish-like
smell do they bring with them. Early to-morrow morning I will take
you to this place and will lay you in ambush. Pick out, therefore,
the three best men you have in your fleet, and I will tell you all
the tricks that the old man will play you. 

"'First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when
he has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go
to sleep among them, as a shepherd among his sheep. The moment you
see that he is asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold
him fast, for he will do his very utmost to get away from you. He
will turn himself into every kind of creature that goes upon the earth,
and will become also both fire and water; but you must hold him fast
and grip him tighter and tighter, till he begins to talk to you and
comes back to what he was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may
slacken your hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the
gods it is that is angry with you, and what you must do to reach your
home over the seas.' 

"Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to
the place where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart
was clouded with care as I went along. When I reached my ship we got
supper ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I took the
three men on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and went
along by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile the goddess
fetched me up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all of them
just skinned, for she meant playing a trick upon her father. Then
she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we should
come up. When we were close to her, she made us lie down in the pits
one after the other, and threw a seal skin over each of us. Our ambuscade
would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy seals was
most distressing- who would go to bed with a sea monster if he could
help it?-but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought of something
that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under each man's
nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of the seals.

"We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the
seals come up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon
the old man of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat
seals he went over them and counted them. We were among the first
he counted, and he never suspected any guile, but laid himself down
to sleep as soon as he had done counting. Then we rushed upon him
with a shout and seized him; on which he began at once with his old
tricks, and changed himself first into a lion with a great mane; then
all of a sudden he became a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar; the next
moment he was running water, and then again directly he was a tree,
but we stuck to him and never lost hold, till at last the cunning
old creature became distressed, and said, Which of the gods was it,
Son of Atreus, that hatched this plot with you for snaring me and
seizing me against my will? What do you want?' 

"'You know that yourself, old man,' I answered, 'you will gain nothing
by trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept so long in
this island, and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am losing
all heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the
immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail
the sea so as to reach my home?' 

"Then,' he said, 'if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly,
you must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the gods before
embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to your friends,
and to your own house, till you have returned to the heaven fed stream
of Egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal gods that reign
in heaven. When you have done this they will let you finish your voyage.'

"I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that long
and terrible voyage to Egypt; nevertheless, I answered, 'I will do
all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell
me true, whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us
when we set sail from Troy have got home safely, or whether any one
of them came to a bad end either on board his own ship or among his
friends when the days of his fighting were done.' 

"'Son of Atreus,' he answered, 'why ask me? You had better not know
what I can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have
heard my story. Many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone,
but many still remain, and only two of the chief men among the Achaeans
perished during their return home. As for what happened on the field
of battle- you were there yourself. A third Achaean leader is still
at sea, alive, but hindered from returning. Ajax was wrecked, for
Neptune drove him on to the great rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he
let him get safe out of the water, and in spite of all Minerva's hatred
he would have escaped death, if he had not ruined himself by boasting.
He said the gods could not drown him even though they had tried to
do so, and when Neptune heard this large talk, he seized his trident
in his two brawny hands, and split the rock of Gyrae in two pieces.
The base remained where it was, but the part on which Ajax was sitting
fell headlong into the sea and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt
water and was drowned. 

"'Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, but
when he was just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was
caught by a heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely against
his will, and drove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell,
but where Aegisthus was then living. By and by, however, it seemed
as though he was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the
wind into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon Agamemnon
kissed his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in
his own country. 

"'Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch,
and to whom he had promised two talents of gold. This man had been
looking out for a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give
him the slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon
go by, he went and told Aegisthus who at once began to lay a plot
for him. He picked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them
in ambuscade on one side the cloister, while on the opposite side
he prepared a banquet. Then he sent his chariots and horsemen to Agamemnon,
and invited him to the feast, but he meant foul play. He got him there,
all unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him
when the banquet was over as though he were butchering an ox in the
shambles; not one of Agamemnon's followers was left alive, nor yet
one of Aegisthus', but they were all killed there in the cloisters.'

"Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him. I sat
down upon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bear
to live nor look upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had
had my fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of
the sea said, 'Son of Atreus, do not waste any more time in crying
so bitterly; it can do no manner of good; find your way home as fast
as ever you can, for Aegisthus be still alive, and even though Orestes
has beforehand with you in kilting him, you may yet come in for his
funeral.' 

"On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, 'I know,
then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of
whom you spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home?
or is he dead? Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.'

"'The third man,' he answered, 'is Ulysses who dwells in Ithaca. I
can see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph
Calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home
for he has no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. As for your
own end, Menelaus, you shall not die in Argos, but the gods will take
you to the Elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. There
fair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than
any where else in the world, for in Elysium there falls not rain,
nor hail, nor snow, but Oceanus breathes ever with a West wind that
sings softly from the sea, and gives fresh life to all men. This will
happen to you because you have married Helen, and are Jove's son-in-law.'

"As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the
ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I
went along. When we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night
was falling, and camped down upon the beach. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and
put our masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves,
took our seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea with our oars.
I again stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and
offered hecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeased
heaven's anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that
his name might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home,
for the gods sent me a fair wind. 

"And now for yourself- stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and
I will then speed you on your way. I will make you a noble present
of a chariot and three horses. I will also give you a beautiful chalice
that so long as you live you may think of me whenever you make a drink-offering
to the immortal gods." 

"Son of Atreus," replied Telemachus, "do not press me to stay longer;
I should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months;
I find your conversation so delightful that I should never once wish
myself at home with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylos
are already impatient, and you are detaining me from them. As for
any present you may be disposed to make me, I had rather that it should
he a piece of plate. I will take no horses back with me to Ithaca,
but will leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have much flat
ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadowsweet and
wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereas
in Ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the country
is more fit for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that.
None of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and
Ithaca least of all." 

Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus's hand within his own. "What you
say," said he, "shows that you come of good family. I both can, and
will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most
precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing-bowl by Vulcan's
own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold.
Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of a visit
which I paid him when I returned thither on my homeward journey. I
will make you a present of it." 

Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king's house.
They brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for
them to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in
the courts]. 

Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at
a mark on the levelled ground in front of Ulysses' house, and were
behaving with all their old insolence. Antinous and Eurymachus, who
were their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, were
sitting together when Noemon son of Phronius came up and said to Antinous,

"Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos?
He has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I have
twelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not
yet broken in, and I want to bring one of them over here and break
him." 

They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that
Telemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus. They thought he was
only away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with
the swineherd; so Antinous said, "When did he go? Tell me truly, and
what young men did he take with him? Were they freemen or his own
bondsmen- for he might manage that too? Tell me also, did you let
him have the ship of your own free will because he asked you, or did
he take it without yourleave?" 

"I lent it him," answered Noemon, "what else could I do when a man
of his position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige
him? I could not possibly refuse. As for those who went with him they
were the best young men we have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain-
or some god who was exactly like him. I cannot understand it, for
I saw Mentor here myself yesterday morning, and yet he was then setting
out for Pylos." 

Noemon then went back to his father's house, but Antinous and Eurymachus
were very angry. They told the others to leave off playing, and to
come and sit down along with themselves. When they came, Antinous
son of Eupeithes spoke in anger. His heart was black with rage, and
his eyes flashed fire as he said: 

"Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter;
we had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow
has got away in spite of us, and with a picked crew too. He will be
giving us trouble presently; may Jove take him before he is full grown.
Find me a ship, therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie
in wait for him in the straits between Ithaca and Samos; he will then
rue the day that he set out to try and get news of his father."

Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then
all of them went inside the buildings. 

It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors were plotting;
for a man servant, Medon, overheard them from outside the outer court
as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tell his mistress.
As he crossed the threshold of her room Penelope said: "Medon, what
have the suitors sent you here for? Is it to tell the maids to leave
their master's business and cook dinner for them? I wish they may
neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere else,
but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make of
my son's estate. Did not your fathers tell you when you were children
how good Ulysses had been to them- never doing anything high-handed,
nor speaking harshly to anybody? Kings may say things sometimes, and
they may take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses
never did an unjust thing by anybody- which shows what bad hearts
you have, and that there is no such thing as gratitude left in this
world." 

Then Medon said, "I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they are
plotting something much more dreadful now- may heaven frustrate their
design. They are going to try and murder Telemachus as he is coming
home from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of his
father." 

Then Penelope's heart sank within her, and for a long time she was
speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no utterance.
At last, however, she said, "Why did my son leave me? What business
had he to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over the
ocean like sea-horses? Does he want to die without leaving any one
behind him to keep up his name?" 

"I do not know," answered Medon, "whether some god set him on to it,
or whether he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out
if his father was dead, or alive and on his way home." 

Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief.
There were plenty of seats in the house, but she. had no heart for
sitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floor
of her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both
old and young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last
in a transport of sorrow she exclaimed, 

"My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction
than any other woman of my age and country. First I lost my brave
and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven,
and whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos, and now
my darling son is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my
having heard one word about his leaving home. You hussies, there was
not one of you would so much as think of giving me a call out of my
bed, though you all of you very well knew when he was starting. If
I had known he meant taking this voyage, he would have had to give
it up, no matter how much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse
behind him- one or other. Now, however, go some of you and call old
Dolius, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who is my
gardener. Bid him go at once and tell everything to Laertes, who may
be able to hit on some plan for enlisting public sympathy on our side,
as against those who are trying to exterminate his own race and that
of Ulysses." 

Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, "You may kill me, Madam, or
let me live on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell
you the real truth. I knew all about it, and gave him everything he
wanted in the way of bread and wine, but he made me take my solemn
oath that I would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days,
unless you asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for he did
not want you to spoil your beauty by crying. And now, Madam, wash
your face, change your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer
prayers to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can save
him even though he be in the jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes:
he has trouble enough already. Besides, I cannot think that the gods
hate die race of the race of the son of Arceisius so much, but there
will be a son left to come up after him, and inherit both the house
and the fair fields that lie far all round it." 

With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried
the tears from her eyes. Penelope washed her face, changed her dress,
and went upstairs with her maids. She then put some bruised barley
into a basket and began praying to Minerva. 

"Hear me," she cried, "Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable.
If ever Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep
or heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling
son from the villainy of the suitors." 

She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer; meanwhile
the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister, and one
of them said: 

"The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us.
Little does she dream that her son has now been doomed to die."

This was what they said, but they did not know what was going to happen.
Then Antinous said, "Comrades, let there be no loud talking, lest
some of it get carried inside. Let us be up and do that in silence,
about which we are all of a mind." 

He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their. ship and to
the sea side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast
and sails inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted
thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft,
while their fine servants brought them their armour. Then they made
the ship fast a little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers,
and waited till night should fall. 

But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink,
and wondering whether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered
by the wicked suitors. Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen
hemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank
into a slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in
the likeness of Penelope's sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who
had married Eumelus and lived in Pherae. She told the vision to go
to the house of Ulysses, and to make Penelope leave off crying, so
it came into her room by the hole through which the thong went for
pulling the door to, and hovered over her head, saying, 

"You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer
you to weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no wrong, so he
will yet come back to you." 

Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,
"Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very often, but I
suppose that is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then,
to leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture
me? I, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every
good quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas
and middle Argos; and now my darling son has gone off on board of
a ship- a foolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor
to going about among gatherings of men. I am even more anxious about
him than about my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think of him,
lest something should happen to him, either from the people among
whom he has gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting
against him, and are bent on killing him before he can return home."

Then the vision said, "Take heart, and be not so much dismayed. There
is one gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have
stand by his side, I mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon
you, and who has sent me to bear you this message." 

"Then," said Penelope, "if you are a god or have been sent here by
divine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one- is he
still alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?"

And the vision said, "I shall not tell you for certain whether he
is alive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation."

Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated
into thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and comforted,
so vivid had been her dream. 

Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the
sea, intent on murdering Telemachus. Now there is a rocky islet called
Asteris, of no great size, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos,
and there is a harbour on either side of it where a ship can lie.
Here then the Achaeans placed themselves in ambush. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK V

And now, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus- harbinger of
light alike to mortals and immortals- the gods met in council and
with them, Jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. Thereon Minerva
began to tell them of the many sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied
him away there in the house of the nymph Calypso. 

"Father Jove," said she, "and all you other gods that live in everlasting
bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind and well-disposed
ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. I hope they will
be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of his subjects
but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled them as though he were their
father. There he is, lying in great pain in an island where dwells
the nymph Calypso, who will not let him go; and he cannot get back
to his own country, for he can find neither ships nor sailors to take
him over the sea. Furthermore, wicked people are now trying to murder
his only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylos and Lacedaemon,
where he has been to see if he can get news of his father."

"What, my dear, are you talking about?" replied her father, "did you
not send him there yourself, because you thought it would help Ulysses
to get home and punish the suitors? Besides, you are perfectly able
to protect Telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the
suitors have to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him."

When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, "Mercury, you
are our messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that
poor Ulysses is to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods
nor men, but after a perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he
is to reach fertile Scheria, the land of the Phaeacians, who are near
of kin to the gods, and will honour him as though he were one of ourselves.
They will send him in a ship to his own country, and will give him
more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought back from
Troy, if he had had had all his prize money and had got home without
disaster. This is how we have settled that he shall return to his
country and his friends." 

Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did
as he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals
with which he could fly like the wind over land and sea. He took the
wand with which he seals men's eyes in sleep or wakes them just as
he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over Pieria; then he swooped
down through the firmament till he reached the level of the sea, whose
waves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing every hole and
corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray.
He flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to
the island which was his journey's end, he left the sea and went on
by land till he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.

He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth,
and one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and
sandal wood. As for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her
golden shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. Round her
cave there was a thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress
trees, wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests- owls,
hawks, and chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the
waters. A vine loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly
about the mouth of the cave; there were also four running rills of
water in channels cut pretty close together, and turned hither and
thither so as to irrigate the beds of violets and luscious herbage
over which they flowed. Even a god could not help being charmed with
such a lovely spot, so Mercury stood still and looked at it; but when
he had admired it sufficiently he went inside the cave. 

Calypso knew him at once- for the gods all know each other, no matter
how far they live from one another- but Ulysses was not within; he
was on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with
tears in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso
gave Mercury a seat and said: "Why have you come to see me, Mercury-
honoured, and ever welcome- for you do not visit me often? Say what
you want; I will do it for be you at once if I can, and if it can
be done at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before
you. 

As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and
mixed him some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had
enough, and then said: 

"We are speaking god and goddess to one another, one another, and
you ask me why I have come here, and I will tell you truly as you
would have me do. Jove sent me; it was no doing of mine; who could
possibly want to come all this way over the sea where there are no
cities full of people to offer me sacrifices or choice hecatombs?
Nevertheless I had to come, for none of us other gods can cross Jove,
nor transgress his orders. He says that you have here the most ill-starred
of alf those who fought nine years before the city of King Priam and
sailed home in the tenth year after having sacked it. On their way
home they sinned against Minerva, who raised both wind and waves against
them, so that all his brave companions perished, and he alone was
carried hither by wind and tide. Jove says that you are to let this
by man go at once, for it is decreed that he shall not perish here,
far from his own people, but shall return to his house and country
and see his friends again." 

Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, "You gods," she exclaimed,
to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealous and hate seeing
a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with him in open
matrimony. So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion, you precious
gods were all of you furious till Diana went and killed him in Ortygia.
So again when Ceres fell in love with Iasion, and yielded to him in
a thrice ploughed fallow field, Jove came to hear of it before so
long and killed Iasion with his thunder-bolts. And now you are angry
with me too because I have a man here. I found the poor creature sitting
all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck his ship with lightning
and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were drowned, while
he himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island. I got fond
of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him immortal,
so that he should never grow old all his days; still I cannot cross
Jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insists
upon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send him
anywhere myself for I have neither ships nor men who can take him.
Nevertheless I will readily give him such advice, in all good faith,
as will be likely to bring him safely to his own country."

"Then send him away," said Mercury, "or Jove will be angry with you
and punish you"' 

On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses,
for she had heard Jove's message. She found him sitting upon the beach
with his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home-sickness;
for he had got tired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep
with her in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have
it so. As for the day time, he spent it on the rocks and on the sea-shore,
weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon
the sea. Calypso then went close up to him said: 

"My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your
life out any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will;
so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with
an upper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. I will put
bread, wine, and water on board to save you from starving. I will
also give you clothes, and will send you a fair wind to take you home,
if the gods in heaven so will it- for they know more about these things,
and can settle them better than I can." 

Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. "Now goddess," he answered, "there
is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help
me home when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on
a raft. Not even a well-found ship with a fair wind could venture
on such a distant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall mage
me go on board a raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean
me no mischief." 

Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: "You know a
great deal," said she, "but you are quite wrong here. May heaven above
and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx-
and this is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take- that
I mean you no sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly
what I should do myself in your place. I am dealing with you quite
straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and I am very sorry
for you." 

When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and Ulysses
followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on and on
till they came to Calypso's cave, where Ulysses took the seat that
Mercury had just left. Calypso set meat and drink before him of the
food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar for
herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before
them. When they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink, Calypso
spoke, saying: 

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own
land at once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how
much suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own
country, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and
let me make you immortal, no matter how anxious you may be to see
this wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after
day; yet I flatter myself that at am no whit less tall or well-looking
than she is, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman should
compare in beauty with an immortal." 

"Goddess," replied Ulysses, "do not be angry with me about this. I
am quite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or so
beautiful as yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are an immortal.
Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothing else. If
some god wrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it and make the
best of it. I have had infinite trouble both by land and sea already,
so let this go with the rest." 

Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired
into the inner part of the cave and went to bed. 

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Ulysses put
on his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light
gossamer fabric, very fine and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle
about her waist and a veil to cover her head. She at once set herself
to think how she could speed Ulysses on his way. So she gave him a
great bronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides,
and had a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. She
also gave him a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of
the island where the largest trees grew- alder, poplar and pine, that
reached the sky- very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for
him in the water. Then, when she had shown him where the best trees
grew, Calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which he soon finished
doing. He cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring
them by rule in good workmanlike fashion. Meanwhile Calypso came back
with some augers, so he bored holes with them and fitted the timbers
together with bolts and rivets. He made the raft as broad as a skilled
shipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he filed a deck on
top of the ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it. He also made a mast
with a yard arm, and a rudder to steer with. He fenced the raft all
round with wicker hurdles as a protection against the waves, and then
he threw on a quantity of wood. By and by Calypso brought him some
linen to make the sails, and he made these too, excellently, making
them fast with braces and sheets. Last of all, with the help of levers,
he drew the raft down into the water. 

In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso
sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean
clothes. She gave him a goat skin full of black wine, and another
larger one of water; she also gave him a wallet full of provisions,
and found him in much good meat. Moreover, she made the wind fair
and warm for him, and gladly did Ulysses spread his sail before it,
while he sat and guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder.
He never closed his eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on late-setting
Bootes, and on the Bear- which men also call the wain, and which turns
round and round where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping
into the stream of Oceanus- for Calypso had told him to keep this
to his left. Days seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the
eighteenth the dim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of
the Phaeacian coast appeared, rising like a shield on the horizon.

But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight
of Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He could
see him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged
his head and muttered to himself, saying, heavens, so the gods have
been changing their minds about Ulysses while I was away in Ethiopia,
and now he is close to the land of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed
that he shall escape from the calamities that have befallen him. Still,
he shall have plenty of hardship yet before he has done with it."

Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred
it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows
till earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth
out of the heavens. Winds from East, South, North, and West fell upon
him all at the same time, and a tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses'
heart began to fail him. "Alas," he said to himself in his dismay,
"what ever will become of me? I am afraid Calypso was right when she
said I should have trouble by sea before I got back home. It is all
coming true. How black is Jove making heaven with his clouds, and
what a sea the winds are raising from every quarter at once. I am
now safe to perish. Blest and thrice blest were those Danaans who
fell before Troy in the cause of the sons of Atreus. Would that had
been killed on the day when the Trojans were pressing me so sorely
about the dead body of Achilles, for then I should have had due burial
and the Achaeans would have honoured my name; but now it seems that
I shall come to a most pitiable end." 

As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the
raft reeled again, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He
let go the helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that
it broke the mast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into
the sea. For a long time Ulysses was under water, and it was all he
could do to rise to the surface again, for the clothes Calypso had
given him weighed him down; but at last he got his head above water
and spat out the bitter brine that was running down his face in streams.
In spite of all this, however, he did not lose sight of his raft,
but swam as fast as he could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed
on board again so as to escape drowning. The sea took the raft and
tossed it about as Autumn winds whirl thistledown round and round
upon a road. It was as though the South, North, East, and West winds
were all playing battledore and shuttlecock with it at once.

When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called Leucothea,
saw him. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been since raised
to the rank of a marine goddess. Seeing in what great distress Ulysses
now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like a sea-gull
from the waves, took her seat upon the raft. 

"My poor good man," said she, "why is Neptune so furiously angry with
you? He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster
he will not kill you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as
I bid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim
to the Phaecian coast where better luck awaits you. And here, take
my veil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can
come to no harm so long as you wear it. As soon as you touch land
take it off, throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then
go away again." With these words she took off her veil and gave it
him. Then she dived down again like a sea-gull and vanished beneath
the dark blue waters. 

But Ulysses did not know what to think. "Alas," he said to himself
in his dismay, "this is only some one or other of the gods who is
luring me to ruin by advising me to will quit my raft. At any rate
I will not do so at present, for the land where she said I should
be quit of all troubles seemed to be still a good way off. I know
what I will do- I am sure it will be best- no matter what happens
I will stick to the raft as long as her timbers hold together, but
when the sea breaks her up I will swim for it; I do not see how I
can do any better than this." 

While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave
that seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over
the raft, which then went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry
chaff tossed about by a whirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank
and rode upon it as if he were on horseback; he then took off the
clothes Calypso had given him, bound Ino's veil under his arms, and
plunged into the sea- meaning to swim on shore. King Neptune watched
him as he did so, and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying,
"'There now, swim up and down as you best can till you fall in with
well-to-do people. I do not think you will be able to say that I have
let you off too lightly." On this he lashed his horses and drove to
Aegae where his palace is. 

But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all
the winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused
a good stiff breeze from the North that should lay the waters till
Ulysses reached the land of the Phaeacians where he would be safe.

Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water,
with a heavy swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but
when the third day broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm
without so much as a breath of air stirring. As he rose on the swell
he looked eagerly ahead, and could see land quite near. Then, as children
rejoice when their dear father begins to get better after having for
a long time borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but
the gods deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when he again
saw land and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might
once more set foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot,
he began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the
swell still broke against them with a terrific roar. Everything was
enveloped in spray; there were no harbours where a ship might ride,
nor shelter of any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and
mountain tops. 

Ulysses' heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly to
himself, "Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that
I had given up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the
coast is rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer
from the sea, with deep water close under them so that I cannot climb
out for want of foothold. I am afraid some great wave will lift me
off my legs and dash me against the rocks as I leave the water- which
would give me a sorry landing. If, on the other hand, I swim further
in search of some shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry
me out to sea again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some
great monster of the deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many
such, and I know that Neptune is very angry with me." 

While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with
such force against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn
to pieces if Minerva had not shown him what to do. He caught hold
of the rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till
the wave retired, so he was saved that time; but presently the wave
came on again and carried him back with it far into the sea-tearing
his hands as the suckers of a polypus are torn when some one plucks
it from its bed, and the stones come up along with it even so did
the rocks tear the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew
him deep down under the water. 

Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his
own destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about
him. He swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating
against the land, and at the same time he kept looking towards the
shore to see if he could find some haven, or a spit that should take
the waves aslant. By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of
a river, and here he thought would be the best place, for there were
no rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. He felt that there
was a current, so he prayed inwardly and said: 

"Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of
the sea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has
lost his way has at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore
in my distress I draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees
of your riverhood. Have mercy upon me, O king, for I declare myself
your suppliant." 

Then the god stayed his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm
before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Here
at last Ulysses' knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had
completely broken him. His body was all swollen, and his mouth and
nostrils ran down like a river with sea-water, so that he could neither
breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently,
when he had got his breath and came to himself again, he took off
the scarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the salt stream
of the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave
that bore it towards her. Then he left the river, laid himself down
among the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth. 

"Alas," he cried to himself in his dismay, "what ever will become
of me, and how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bed
through the long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the
bitter cold and damp may make an end of me- for towards sunrise there
will be a keen wind blowing from off the river. If, on the other hand,
I climb the hill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some
thicket, I may escape the cold and have a good night's rest, but some
savage beast may take advantage of me and devour me." 

In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found one
upon some high ground not far from the water. There he crept beneath
two shoots of olive that grew from a single stock- the one an ungrafted
sucker, while the other had been grafted. No wind, however squally,
could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun's rays
pierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they grow
into one another. Ulysses crept under these and began to make himself
a bed to lie on, for there was a great litter of dead leaves lying
about- enough to make a covering for two or three men even in hard
winter weather. He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himself
down and heaped the leaves all round him. Then, as one who lives alone
in the country, far from any neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed
in the ashes to save himself from having to get a light elsewhere,
even so did Ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and Minerva shed
a sweet sleep upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose
all memories of his sorrows. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VI

So here Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went
off to the country and city of the Phaecians- a people who used to
live in the fair town of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. Now
the Cyclopes were stronger than they and plundered them, so their
king Nausithous moved them thence and settled them in Scheria, far
from all other people. He surrounded the city with a wall, built houses
and temples, and divided the lands among his people; but he was dead
and gone to the house of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counsels
were inspired of heaven, was now reigning. To his house, then, did
Minerva hie in furtherance of the return of Ulysses. 

She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there
slept a girl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to
King Alcinous. Two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very
pretty, one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well-made
folding doors. Minerva took the form of the famous sea captain Dymas's
daughter, who was a bosom friend of Nausicaa and just her own age;
then, coming up to the girl's bedside like a breath of wind, she hovered
over her head and said: 

"Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazy
daughter? Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are
going to be married almost immediately, and should not only be well
dressed yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attend
you. This is the way to get yourself a good name, and to make your
father and mother proud of you. Suppose, then, that we make tomorrow
a washing day, and start at daybreak. I will come and help you so
that you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the
best young men among your own people are courting you, and you are
not going to remain a maid much longer. Ask your father, therefore,
to have a waggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs,
robes, and girdles; and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter
for you than walking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the
town." 

When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say
is the everlasting home of the gods. Here no wind beats roughly, and
neither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine
and in a great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are
illumined for ever and ever. This was the place to which the goddess
went when she had given instructions to the girl. 

By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about
her dream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell
her father and mother all about it, and found them in their own room.
Her mother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with
her maids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as
he was going out to attend a meeting of the town council, which the
Phaeacian aldermen had convened. She stopped him and said:

"Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon? I want
to take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You are
the chief man here, so it is only right that you should have a clean
shirt when you attend meetings of the council. Moreover, you have
five sons at home, two of them married, while the other three are
good-looking bachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen
when they go to a dance, and I have been thinking about all this."

She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like
to, but her father knew and said, "You shall have the mules, my love,
and whatever else you have a mind for. Be off with you, and the men
shall get you a good strong waggon with a body to it that will hold
all your clothes." 

On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out,
harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the clothes
down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon. Her mother
prepared her a basket of provisions with all sorts of good things,
and a goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon, and
her mother gave her also a golden cruse of oil, that she and her women
might anoint themselves. Then she took the whip and reins and lashed
the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered on the
road. They pulled without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaa
and her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.

When they reached the water side they went to the washing-cisterns,
through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any
quantity of linen, no matter how dirty. Here they unharnessed the
mules and turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that
grew by the water side. They took the clothes out of the waggon, put
them in the water, and vied with one another in treading them in the
pits to get the dirt out. After they had washed them and got them
quite clean, they laid them out by the sea side, where the waves had
raised a high beach of shingle, and set about washing themselves and
anointing themselves with olive oil. Then they got their dinner by
the side of the stream, and waited for the sun to finish drying the
clothes. When they had done dinner they threw off the veils that covered
their heads and began to play at ball, while Nausicaa sang for them.
As the huntress Diana goes forth upon the mountains of Taygetus or
Erymanthus to hunt wild boars or deer, and the wood-nymphs, daughters
of Aegis-bearing Jove, take their sport along with her (then is Leto
proud at seeing her daughter stand a full head taller than the others,
and eclipse the loveliest amid a whole bevy of beauties), even so
did the girl outshine her handmaids. 

When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the
clothes and putting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider
how Ulysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct
him to the city of the Phaeacians. The girl, therefore, threw a ball
at one of the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water. On
this they all shouted, and the noise they made woke Ulysses, who sat
up in his bed of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be.

"Alas," said he to himself, "what kind of people have I come amongst?
Are they cruel, savage, and uncivilized, or hospitable and humane?
I seem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those
of the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows
of green grass. At any rate I am among a race of men and women. Let
me try if I cannot manage to get a look at them." 

As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a bough
covered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. He looked like some
lion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength
and defying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest
of oxen, sheep, or deer, for he is famished, and will dare break even
into a well-fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep- even such
did Ulysses seem to the young women, as he drew near to them all naked
as he was, for he was in great want. On seeing one so unkempt and
so begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits
that jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm,
for Minerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from
her. She stood right in front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he
should go up to her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees
as a suppliant, or stay where he was and entreat her to give him some
clothes and show him the way to the town. In the end he deemed it
best to entreat her from a distance in case the girl should take offence
at his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so he addressed her
in honeyed and persuasive language. 

"O queen," he said, "I implore your aid- but tell me, are you a goddess
or are you a mortal woman? If you are a goddess and dwell in heaven,
I can only conjecture that you are Jove's daughter Diana, for your
face and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are
a mortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and mother-
thrice happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and delighted
they must feel when they see so fair a scion as yourself going out
to a dance; most happy, however, of all will he be whose wedding gifts
have been the richest, and who takes you to his own home. I never
yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am lost in
admiration as I behold you. I can only compare you to a young palm
tree which I saw when I was at Delos growing near the altar of Apollo-
for I was there, too, with much people after me, when I was on that
journey which has been the source of all my troubles. Never yet did
such a young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and I admired
and wondered at it exactly as I now admire and wonder at yourself.
I dare not clasp your knees, but I am in great distress; yesterday
made the twentieth day that I had been tossing about upon the sea.
The winds and waves have taken me all the way from the Ogygian island,
and now fate has flung me upon this coast that I may endure still
further suffering; for I do not think that I have yet come to the
end of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in store for
me. 

"And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person
I have met, and I know no one else in this country. Show me the way
to your town, and let me have anything that you may have brought hither
to wrap your clothes in. May heaven grant you in all things your heart's
desire- husband, house, and a happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing
better in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind
in a house. It discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their
friends glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one."

To this Nausicaa answered, "Stranger, you appear to be a sensible,
well-disposed person. There is no accounting for luck; Jove gives
prosperity to rich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take what
he has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. Now, however,
that you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothes
nor for anything else that a foreigner in distress may reasonably
look for. I will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the
name of our people; we are called Phaeacians, and I am daughter to
Alcinous, in whom the whole power of the state is vested."

Then she called her maids and said, "Stay where you are, you girls.
Can you not see a man without running away from him? Do you take him
for a robber or a murderer? Neither he nor any one else can come here
to do us Phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live
apart on a land's end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing
to do with any other people. This is only some poor man who has lost
his way, and we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners
in distress are under Jove's protection, and will take what they can
get and be thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to
eat and drink, and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered
from the wind." 

On this the maids left off running away and began calling one another
back. They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had told
them, and brought him a shirt and cloak. They also brought him the
little golden cruse of oil, and told him to go wash in the stream.
But Ulysses said, "Young women, please to stand a little on one side
that I may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with
oil, for it is long enough since my skin has had a drop of oil upon
it. I cannot wash as long as you all keep standing there. I am ashamed
to strip before a number of good-looking young women." 

Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysses
washed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back
and from his broad shoulders. When he had thoroughly washed himself,
and had got the brine out of his hair, he anointed himself with oil,
and put on the clothes which the girl had given him; Minerva then
made him look taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair
grow thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth
blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders as a skilful
workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minerva
enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it- and his work is full
of beauty. Then he went and sat down a little way off upon the beach,
looking quite young and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration;
then she said to her maids: 

"Hush, my dears, for I want to say something. I believe the gods who
live in heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. When I first
saw him I thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of
the gods who dwell in heaven. I should like my future husband to be
just such another as he is, if he would only stay here and not want
to go away. However, give him something to eat and drink."

They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate and
drank ravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind.
Meanwhile, Nausicaa bethought her of another matter. She got the linen
folded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as
she took her seat, she called Ulysses: 

"Stranger," said she, "rise and let us be going back to the town;
I will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I
can tell you that you will meet all the best people among the Phaecians.
But be sure and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person.
As long as we are going past the fields- and farm lands, follow briskly
behind the waggon along with the maids and I will lead the way myself.
Presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find
a high wall running all round it, and a good harbour on either side
with a narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn
up by the road side, for every one has a place where his own ship
can lie. You will see the market place with a temple of Neptune in
the middle of it, and paved with large stones bedded in the earth.
Here people deal in ship's gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails,
and here, too, are the places where oars are made, for the Phaeacians
are not a nation of archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows,
but are a sea-faring folk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars,
and ships, with which they travel far over the sea. 

"I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against
me later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low
fellow, if he met us, might say, 'Who is this fine-looking stranger
that is going about with Nausicaa? Where did she End him? I suppose
she is going to marry him. Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she
has taken from some foreign vessel, for we have no neighbours; or
some god has at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers,
and she is going to live with him all the rest of her life. It would
be a good thing if she would take herself of I for sh and find a husband
somewhere else, for she will not look at one of the many excellent
young Phaeacians who are in with her.' This is the kind of disparaging
remark that would be made about me, and I could not complain, for
I should myself be scandalized at seeing any other girl do the like,
and go about with men in spite of everybody, while her father and
mother were still alive, and without having been married in the face
of all the world. 

"If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help
you home, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars
by the road side dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow
all round it. Here my father has a field of rich garden ground, about
as far from the town as a man' voice will carry. Sit down there and
wait for a while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach
my father's house. Then, when you think we must have done this, come
into the town and ask the way to the house of my father Alcinous.
You will have no difficulty in finding it; any child will point it
out to you, for no one else in the whole town has anything like such
a fine house as he has. When you have got past the gates and through
the outer court, go right across the inner court till you come to
my mother. You will find her sitting by the fire and spinning her
purple wool by firelight. It is a fine sight to see her as she leans
back against one of the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind
her. Close to her seat stands that of my father, on which he sits
and topes like an immortal god. Never mind him, but go up to my mother,
and lay your hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. If
you can gain her over, you may hope to see your own country again,
no matter how distant it may be." 

So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.
The mules drew well and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.
She was careful not to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were
following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with
judgement. As the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove
of Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter
of Jove. 

"Hear me," he cried, "daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable,
hear me now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wrecking
me. Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friends
and be hospitably received by the Phaecians." 

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not
show herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune,
who was still furious in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting
home. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VII

Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the
town. When she reached her father's house she drew up at the gateway,
and her brothers- comely as the gods- gathered round her, took the
mules out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while
she went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira,
lit the fire for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from
Apeira, and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was
king over the Phaecians, and the people obeyed him as though he were
a god. She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for
her, and brought her supper for her into her own room. 

Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed
a thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaecians
who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was. Then, as
he was just entering the town, she came towards him in the likeness
of a little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in front of him,
and Ulysses said: 

"My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous?
I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in
your town and country." 

Then Minerva said, "Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house
you want, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will
go before you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and
do not look at any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here
cannot abide strangers, and do not like men who come from some other
place. They are a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace
of Neptune in ships that glide along like thought, or as a bird in
the air." 

On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not
one of the Phaecians could see him as he passed through the city in
the midst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will
towards him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired
their harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of
the city, which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking,
and when they reached the king's house Minerva said: 

"This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show
you. You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but
do not be afraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more
likely he is to carry his point, even though he is a stranger. First
find the queen. Her name is Arete, and she comes of the same family
as her husband Alcinous. They both descend originally from Neptune,
who was father to Nausithous by Periboea, a woman of great beauty.
Periboea was the youngest daughter of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned
over the giants, but he ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own
life to boot. 

"Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him,
the great Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaecians. Nausithous had
two sons Rhexenor and Alcinous; Apollo killed the first of them while
he was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter
Arete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honoured
of all those that keep house along with their husbands. 

"Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her
children, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon
her as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city,
for she is a thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when
any women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to
settle their disputes. If you can gain her good will, you may have
every hope of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to
your home and country." 

Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went to
Marathon and to the spacious streets of Athens, where she entered
the abode of Erechtheus; but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous,
and he pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the threshold
of bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun
or moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end,
and the cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung
on pillars of silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel
was silver and the hook of the door was of gold. 

On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan,
with his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over
the palace of king Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never
grow old. Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from
one end to the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the
women of the house had made. Here the chief persons of the Phaecians
used to sit and eat and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons;
and there were golden figures of young men with lighted torches in
their hands, raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those
who were at table. There are fifty maid servants in the house, some
of whom are always grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others
work at the loom, or sit and spin, and their shuttles go, backwards
and forwards like the fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen
is so closely woven that it will turn oil. As the Phaecians are the
best sailors in the world, so their women excel all others in weaving,
for Minerva has taught them all manner of useful arts, and they are
very intelligent. 

Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of about
four acres with a wall all round it. It is full of beautiful trees-
pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There are luscious
figs also, and olives in full growth. The fruits never rot nor fail
all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so soft
that a new crop ripens before the old has dropped. Pear grows on pear,
apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for there
is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this, the
grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being
gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further
on have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others
again are just changing colour. In the furthest part of the ground
there are beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all
the year round. Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts
throughout the whole garden, while the other is carried under the
ground of the outer court to the house itself, and the town's people
draw water from it. Such, then, were the splendours with which the
gods had endowed the house of king Alcinous. 

So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he
had looked long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the
precincts of the house. There he found all the chief people among
the Phaecians making their drink-offerings to Mercury, which they
always did the last thing before going away for the night. He went
straight through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness
in which Minerva had enveloped him, till he reached Arete and King
Alcinous; then he laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and
at that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and he became
visible. Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there,
but Ulysses began at once with his petition. 

"Queen Arete," he exclaimed, "daughter of great Rhexenor, in my distress
I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests (whom
may heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they leave
their possessions to their children, and all the honours conferred
upon them by the state) to help me home to my own country as soon
as possible; for I have been long in trouble and away from my friends."

Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their
peace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent
speaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty
addressed them thus: 

"Alcinous," said he, "it is not creditable to you that a stranger
should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is
waiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise
and take a seat on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants
mix some wine and water that we may make a drink-offering to Jove
the lord of thunder, who takes all well-disposed suppliants under
his protection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever
there may be in the house." 

When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from
the hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been sitting
beside him, and was his favourite son. A maid servant then brought
him water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin
for him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean table beside him;
an upper servant brought him bread and offered him many good things
of what there was in the house, and Ulysses ate and drank. Then Alcinous
said to one of the servants, "Pontonous, mix a cup of wine and hand
it round that we may make drink-offerings to Jove the lord of thunder,
who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants." 

Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering. When they had made their offerings,
and had drunk each as much as he was minded, Alcinous said:

"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. You
have had your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shall
invite a still larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial
banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of
his escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing
to his own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, no
matter how distant it may be. We must see that he comes to no harm
while on his homeward journey, but when he is once at home he will
have to take the luck he was born with for better or worse like other
people. It is possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals
who has come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods
are departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made
themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them hecatombs.
They come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves, and if
any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other of
them, they affect no concealment, for we are as near of kin to the
gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are." 

Then Ulysses said: "Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into
your head. I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body
nor mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.
Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon
me, you would say that I was still worse off than they are. Nevertheless,
let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a very importunate
thing, and thrusts itself on a man's notice no matter how dire is
his distress. I am in great trouble, yet it insists that I shall eat
and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows and dwell only
on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, do as you propose,
and at break of day set about helping me to get home. I shall be content
to die if I may first once more behold my property, my bondsmen, and
all the greatness of my house." 

Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that
he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then
when they had made their drink-offerings, and had drunk each as much
as he was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode,
leaving Ulysses in the cloister with Arete and Alcinous while the
servants were taking the things away after supper. Arete was the first
to speak, for she recognized the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that
Ulysses was wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she
said, "Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should
like to ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes?
Did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?" 

And Ulysses answered, "It would be a long story Madam, were I to relate
in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been
laid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island
far away in the sea which is called 'the Ogygian.' Here dwells the
cunning and powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives
by herself far from all neighbours human or divine. Fortune, however,
me to her hearth all desolate and alone, for Jove struck my ship with
his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My brave comrades
were drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and was carried
hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last during
the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to the Ogygian
island where the great goddess Calypso lives. She took me in and treated
me with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me immortal
that I might never grow old, but she could not persuade me to let
her do so. 

"I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the
good clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but
at last when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her
own free will, either because Jove had told her she must, or because
she had changed her mind. She sent me from her island on a raft, which
she provisioned with abundance of bread and wine. Moreover she gave
me good stout clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both warm and
fair. Days seven and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth
I caught sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast-
and glad indeed was I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was
still much trouble in store for me, for at this point Neptune would
let me go no further, and raised a great storm against me; the sea
was so terribly high that I could no longer keep to my raft, which
went to pieces under the fury of the gale, and I had to swim for it,
till wind and current brought me to your shores. 

"There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and
the waves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea
and swam on till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing
place, for there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind.
Here, then, I got out of the water and gathered my senses together
again. Night was coming on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket,
where I covered myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven
sent me off into a very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as I was I slept
among the leaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon,
when I woke as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter's maid
servants playing upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking
like a goddess. I besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent
disposition, much more so than could be expected from so young a person-
for young people are apt to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty of
bread and wine, and when she had had me washed in the river she also
gave me the clothes in which you see me. Now, therefore, though it
has pained me to do so, I have told you the whole truth."

Then Alcinous said, "Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not
to bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that
she was the first person whose aid you asked." 

"Pray do not scold her," replied Ulysses; "she is not to blame. She
did tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and
afraid, for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me.
Every human being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable."

"Stranger," replied Alcinous, "I am not the kind of man to get angry
about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by Father
Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you
are, and how much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry
my daughter, and become my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give
you a house and an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you
here against your own wish, and that you may be sure of this I will
attend to-morrow to the matter of your escort. You can sleep during
the whole voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth
waters either to your own home, or wherever you please, even though
it be a long way further off than Euboea, which those of my people
who saw it when they took yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus
the son of Gaia, tell me is the furthest of any place- and yet they
did the whole voyage in a single day without distressing themselves,
and came back again afterwards. You will thus see how much my ships
excel all others, and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are."

Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, "Father Jove, grant
that Alcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable
name among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country."

Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in
the room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs,
and to spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for
Ulysses to wear. The maids thereon went out with torches in their
hands, and when they had made the bed they came up to Ulysses and
said, "Rise, sir stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready,"
and glad indeed was he to go to his rest. 

So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway;
but Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his
wife by his side. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VIII

Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinous
and Ulysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaecian place
of assembly, which was near the ships. When they got there they sat
down side by side on a seat of polished stone, while Minerva took
the form of one of Alcinous' servants, and went round the town in
order to help Ulysses to get home. She went up to the citizens, man
by man, and said, "Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians,
come to the assembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has
just come off a long voyage to the house of King Alcinous; he looks
like an immortal god." 

With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked
to the assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. Every
one was struck with the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautified
him about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter
than he really was, that he might impress the Phaecians favourably
as being a very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many
trials of skill to which they would challenge him. Then, when they
were got together, Alcinous spoke: 

"Hear me," said he, "aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians,
that I may speak even as I am minded. This stranger, whoever he may
be, has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either East
or West. He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled.
Let us then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before
him; indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house has been able to
complain of me for not speeding on his way soon enough. Let us draw
a ship into the sea- one that has never yet made a voyage- and man
her with two and fifty of our smartest young sailors. Then when you
have made fast your oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and
come to my house to prepare a feast. I will find you in everything.
I am giving will these instructions to the young men who will form
the crew, for as regards you aldermen and town councillors, you will
join me in entertaining our guest in the cloisters. I can take no
excuses, and we will have Demodocus to sing to us; for there is no
bard like him whatever he may choose to sing about." 

Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a
servant went to fetch Demodocus. The fifty-two picked oarsmen went
to the sea shore as they had been told, and when they got there they
drew the ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound
the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in
due course, and spread the white sails aloft. They moored the vessel
a little way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the
house of King Alcinous. The outhouses, yards, and all the precincts
were filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young;
and Alcinous killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and
two oxen. These they skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent
banquet. 

A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse
had dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for
though she had endowed him with a divine gift of song, she had robbed
him of his eyesight. Pontonous set a seat for him among the guests,
leaning it up against a bearing-post. He hung the lyre for him on
a peg over his head, and showed him where he was to feel for it with
his hands. He also set a fair table with a basket of victuals by his
side, and a cup of wine from which he might drink whenever he was
so disposed. 

The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before
them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse
inspired Demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially
a matter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel
between Ulysses and Achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped
on one another as they gat together at a banquet. But Agamemnon was
glad when he heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for
Apollo had foretold him this at Pytho when he crossed the stone floor
to consult the oracle. Here was the beginning of the evil that by
the will of Jove fell both Danaans and Trojans. 

Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head
and covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see
that he was weeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears
from his eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a drink-offering
to the gods; but when the Phaeacians pressed Demodocus to sing further,
for they delighted in his lays, then Ulysses again drew his mantle
over his head and wept bitterly. No one noticed his distress except
Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and heard the heavy sighs that
he was heaving. So he at once said, "Aldermen and town councillors
of the Phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of the feast, and
of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us proceed therefore
to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his return home may be
able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as
boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and runners." 

With these words he led the way, and the others followed after. A
servant hung Demodocus's lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the
cloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the
chief men of the Phaeacians were going to see the sports; a crowd
of several thousands of people followed them, and there were many
excellent competitors for all the prizes. Acroneos, Ocyalus, Elatreus,
Nauteus, Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, Anabesineus,
and Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton. There was also Euryalus
son of Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best looking
man among the Phaecians except Laodamas. Three sons of Alcinous, Laodamas,
Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also. 

The foot races came first. The course was set out for them from the
starting post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flew
forward at the same moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long way;
he left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that
a couple of mules can plough in a fallow field. They then turned to
the painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved to be the best
man. Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing
the disc there was no one who could approach Elatreus. Alcinous's
son Laodamas was the best boxer, and he it was who presently said,
when they had all been diverted with the games, "Let us ask the stranger
whether he excels in any of these sports; he seems very powerfully
built; his thighs, claves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength,
nor is he at all old, but he has suffered much lately, and there is
nothing like the sea for making havoc with a man, no matter how strong
he is." 

"You are quite right, Laodamas," replied Euryalus, "go up to your
guest and speak to him about it yourself." 

When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowd
and said to Ulysses, "I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself for
some one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any of
them- and you must have gone in for many a one before now. There is
nothing that does any one so much credit all his life long as the
showing himself a proper man with his hands and feet. Have a try therefore
at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind. Your return home
will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawn into the water,
and the crew is found." 

Ulysses answered, "Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? my mind
is set rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinite
trouble, and am come among you now as a suppliant, praying your king
and people to further me on my return home." 

Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, "I gather, then, that
you are unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight
in. I suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about
in ships as captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of
their outward freights and homeward cargoes. There does not seem to
be much of the athlete about you." 

"For shame, Sir," answered Ulysses, fiercely, "you are an insolent
fellow- so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in
speech, person, and understanding. One man may be of weak presence,
but heaven has adorned this with such a good conversation that he
charms every one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his
hearers with him so that he is leader in all assemblies of his fellows,
and wherever he goes he is looked up to. Another may be as handsome
as a god, but his good looks are not crowned with discretion. This
is your case. No god could make a finer looking fellow than you are,
but you are a fool. Your ill-judged remarks have made me exceedingly
angry, and you are quite mistaken, for I excel in a great many athletic
exercises; indeed, so long as I had youth and strength, I was among
the first athletes of the age. Now, however, I am worn out by labour
and sorrow, for I have gone through much both on the field of battle
and by the waves of the weary sea; still, in spite of all this I will
compete, for your taunts have stung me to the quick." 

So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc,
larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacians
when disc-throwing among themselves. Then, swinging it back, he threw
it from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as
he did so. The Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight
as it sped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that
had been made yet. Minerva, in the form of a man, came and marked
the place where it had fallen. "A blind man, Sir," said she, "could
easily tell your mark by groping for it- it is so far ahead of any
other. You may make your mind easy about this contest, for no Phaeacian
can come near to such a throw as yours." 

Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on,
so he began to speak more pleasantly. "Young men," said he, "come
up to that throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy
or even heavier. If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come
on, for I am exceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do
not care what it is, with any man of you all except Laodamas, but
not with him because I am his guest, and one cannot compete with one's
own personal friend. At least I do not think it a prudent or a sensible
thing for a guest to challenge his host's family at any game, especially
when he is in a foreign country. He will cut the ground from under
his own feet if he does; but I make no exception as regards any one
else, for I want to have the matter out and know which is the best
man. I am a good hand at every kind of athletic sport known among
mankind. I am an excellent archer. In battle I am always the first
to bring a man down with my arrow, no matter how many more are taking
aim at him alongside of me. Philoctetes was the only man who could
shoot better than I could when we Achaeans were before Troy and in
practice. I far excel every one else in the whole world, of those
who still eat bread upon the face of the earth, but I should not like
to shoot against the mighty dead, such as Hercules, or Eurytus the
Cechalian-men who could shoot against the gods themselves. This in
fact was how Eurytus came prematurely by his end, for Apollo was angry
with him and killed him because he challenged him as an archer. I
can throw a dart farther than any one else can shoot an arrow. Running
is the only point in respect of which I am afraid some of the Phaecians
might beat me, for I have been brought down very low at sea; my provisions
ran short, and therefore I am still weak." 

They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, "Sir, we
have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from
which I understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having
been displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to
you by one of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered
by any one who knows how to talk with propriety. I hope you will apprehend
my meaning, and will explain to any be one of your chief men who may
be dining with yourself and your family when you get home, that we
have an hereditary aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are
not particularly remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers,
but we are singularly fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We
are extremely fond of good dinners, music, and dancing; we also like
frequent changes of linen, warm baths, and good beds, so now, please,
some of you who are the best dancers set about dancing, that our guest
on his return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass
all other nations as sailors, runners, dancers, minstrels. Demodocus
has left his lyre at my house, so run some one or other of you and
fetch it for him." 

On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king's house,
and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It
was their business to manage everything connected with the sports,
so they made the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers.
Presently the servant came back with Demodocus's lyre, and he took
his place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in
the town began to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was delighted
with the merry twinkling of their feet. 

Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and
how they first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made
Venus many presents, and defiled King Vulcan's marriage bed, so the
sun, who saw what they were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry
when he heard such dreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding
mischief, got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some
chains which none could either unloose or break, so that they might
stay there in that place. When he had finished his snare he went into
his bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like
cobwebs; he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling.
Not even a god could see them, so fine and subtle were they. As soon
as he had spread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he
were setting out for the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places
in the world was the one he was most fond of. But Mars kept no blind
look out, and as soon as he saw him start, hurried off to his house,
burning with love for Venus. 

Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was
about sitting down when Mars came inside the house, an said as he
took her hand in his own, "Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is
not at home, but is gone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech
is barbarous." 

She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest,
whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread
for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found
too late that they were in a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for
he had turned back before reaching Lemnos, when his scout the sun
told him what was going on. He was in a furious passion, and stood
in the vestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted to all the
gods. 

"Father Jove," he cried, "and all you other blessed gods who live
for ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that
I will show you. Jove's daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because
I am lame. She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built,
whereas I am a cripple- but my parents are to blame for that, not
I; they ought never to have begotten me. Come and see the pair together
asleep on my bed. It makes me furious to look at them. They are very
fond of one another, but I do not think they will lie there longer
than they can help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there,
however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gave
him for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest."

On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encircling
Neptune came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but
the goddesses stayed at home all of them for shame. Then the givers
of all good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared
with inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Vulcan had
been, whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying:

"Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See how
limping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest
god in heaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages."

Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, "Messenger
Mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains
were, would you, if you could sleep with Venus?" 

"King Apollo," answered Mercury, "I only wish I might get the chance,
though there were three times as many chains- and you might look on,
all of you, gods and goddesses, but would sleep with her if I could."

The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune
took it all seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free
again. "Let him go," he cried, "and I will undertake, as you require,
that he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among
the immortal gods." 

"Do not," replied Vulcan, "ask me to do this; a bad man's bond is
bad security; what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should
go away and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?"

"Vulcan," said Neptune, "if Mars goes away without paying his damages,
I will pay you myself." So Vulcan answered, "In this case I cannot
and must not refuse you." 

Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were
free they scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus
to Cyprus and to Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant
with burnt offerings. Here the Graces hathed her, and anointed her
with oil of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they
clothed her in raiment of the most enchanting beauty. 

Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians
were charmed as they heard him. 

Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was
no one to compete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus
had made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw
it up towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground
and caught it with ease before it came down again. When they had done
throwing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and
at the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one
another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a
great stamping with their feet. Then Ulysses said: 

"King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in
the world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I was
astonished as I saw them." 

The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaecians "Aldermen
and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person of singular judgement;
let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he may reasonably
expect. There are twelve chief men among you, and counting myself
there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a clean cloak, a shirt,
and a talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in a lump down
at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so with a light
heart. As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apology and a
present too, for he has been rude." 

Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, and
sent their servants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, "King
Alcinous, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require.
He shall have sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is
of silver. I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into
which it fits. It will be worth a great deal to him." 

As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said,
"Good luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss
may the winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe
return, for I understand you have been long away from home, and have
gone through much hardship." 

To which Ulysses answered, "Good luck to you too my friend, and may
the gods grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword
you have given me along with your apology." 

With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards
sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants
of the donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here
his sons received them, and placed them under their mother's charge.
Then Alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their
seats. 

"Wife," said he, turning to Queen Arete, "Go, fetch the best chest
we have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper
on the fire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath;
see also to the careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians
have made him; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing
that will follow. I shall myself give him this golden goblet- which
is of exquisite workmanship- that he may be reminded of me for the
rest of his life whenever he makes a drink-offering to Jove, or to
any of the gods." 

Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast
as they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to
a clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water
became hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod. Meanwhile
Arete brought a magnificent chest her own room, and inside it she
packed all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the Phaeacians
had brought. Lastly she added a cloak and a good shirt from Alcinous,
and said to Ulysses: 

"See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once,
for fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in
your ship." 

When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast
with a bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upper
servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. He was very
glad of a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since
he left the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her
had taken as good care of him as though he had been a god. When the
servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given
him a clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the
guests who were sitting over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by
one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof if the cloister, and
admired him as she saw him pass. "Farewell stranger," said she, "do
not forget me when you are safe at home again, for it is to me first
that you owe a ransom for having saved your life." 

And Ulysses said, "Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove
the mighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall
I bless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved
me." 

When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper was
then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in
the favourite bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company,
near one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might
lean against it. Then Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty
of fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant,
"Take this piece of pork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it;
for all the pain his lays may cause me I will salute him none the
less; bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the
muse teaches them their songs and loves them." 

The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who
took it and was very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the
good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to
eat and drink, Ulysses said to Demodocus, "Demodocus, there is no
one in the world whom I admire more than I do you. You must have studied
under the Muse, Jove's daughter, and under Apollo, so accurately do
you sing the return of the Achaeans with all their sufferings and
adventures. If you were not there yourself, you must have heard it
all from some one who was. Now, however, change your song and tell
us of the wooden horse which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva,
and which Ulysses got by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting
it with the men who afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this
tale aright I will tell all the world how magnificently heaven has
endowed you." 

The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some
of the Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others,
hidden within the horse, were waiting with Ulysses in the Trojan place
of assembly. For the Trojans themselves had drawn the horse into their
fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it, and
were in three minds as to what they should do. Some were for breaking
it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top of the
rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the precipice;
while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering and propitiation
for the gods. And this was how they settled it in the end, for the
city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which were all
the bravest of the Argives waiting to bring death and destruction
on the Trojans. Anon he sang how the sons of the Achaeans issued from
the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their ambuscade.
He sang how they over ran the city hither and thither and ravaged
it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along with Menelaus to the
house of Deiphobus. It was there that the fight raged most furiously,
nevertheless by Minerva's help he was victorious. 

All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his
cheeks were wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throws
herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city
and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children.
She screams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping
for breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the
back and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life of labour
and sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks- even so piteously
did Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except
Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs
that he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:

"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease
his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it.
From the moment that we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing,
our guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. He is evidently
in great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy
ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will be much more as it should
be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that
we are making with so much good will, are wholly in his honour, and
any one with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he
ought to treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.

"Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment nor
reserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more
polite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which
your father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which
you were known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. There is
no one, neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name
whatever, for people's fathers and mothers give them names as soon
as they are born. Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that
our ships may shape their purpose accordingly and take you there.
For the Phaeacians have no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as
those of other nations have, but the ships themselves understand what
it is that we are thinking about and want; they know all the cities
and countries in the whole world, and can traverse the sea just as
well even when it is covered with mist and cloud, so that there is
no danger of being wrecked or coming to any harm. Still I do remember
hearing my father say that Neptune was angry with us for being too
easy-going in the matter of giving people escorts. He said that one
of these days he should wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from
having escorted some one, and bury our city under a high mountain.
This is what my used to say, but whether the god will carry out his
threat or no is a matter which he will decide for himself.

"And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering,
and in what countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoples themselves,
and of their cities- who were hostile, savage and uncivilized, and
who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane. Tell us also why you
are made unhappy on hearing about the return of the Argive Danaans
from Troy. The gods arranged all this, and sent them their misfortunes
in order that future generations might have something to sing about.
Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife's when you were before
Troy? a son-in-law or father-in-law- which are the nearest relations
a man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some brave and
kindly-natured comrade- for a good friend is as dear to a man as his
own brother?" 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IX

And Ulysses answered, "King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear
a bard with such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing
better or more delightful than when a whole people make merry together,
with the guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded
with bread and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his
cup for every man. This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see.
Now, however, since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows,
and rekindle my own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know
how to begin, nor yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the
hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. 

"Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it,
and one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my there
guests though I live so far away from all of you. I am Ulysses son
of Laertes, reknowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so
that my fame ascends to heaven. I live in Ithaca, where there is a
high mountain called Neritum, covered with forests; and not far from
it there is a group of islands very near to one another- Dulichium,
Same, and the wooded island of Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon,
all highest up in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie
away from it towards dawn. It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave
men, and my eyes know none that they better love to look upon. The
goddess Calypso kept me with her in her cave, and wanted me to marry
her, as did also the cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they could
neither of them persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man
than his own country and his parents, and however splendid a home
he may have in a foreign country, if it be far from father or mother,
he does not care about it. Now, however, I will tell you of the many
hazardous adventures which by Jove's will I met with on my return
from Troy. 

"When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which
is the city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people
to the sword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we divided
equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain.
I then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very foolishly
would not obey me, so they stayed there drinking much wine and killing
great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea shore. Meanwhile the Cicons
cried out for help to other Cicons who lived inland. These were more
in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of
war, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the
occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as
leaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us,
so that we were hard pressed. They set the battle in array near the
ships, and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another.
So long as the day waxed and it was still morning, we held our own
against them, though they were more in number than we; but as the
sun went down, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Cicons
got the better of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every ship
we had; so we got away with those that were left. 

"Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have
escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till
we had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished
by the hands of the Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against
us till it blew a hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick
clouds, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. We let the ships
run before the gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters,
so we took them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest
towards the land. There we lay two days and two nights suffering much
alike from toil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the third
day we again raised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting
the wind and steersmen direct our ship. I should have got home at
that time unharmed had not the North wind and the currents been against
me as I was doubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by
the island of Cythera. 

"I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the
sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eater,
who live on a food that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed
to take in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the
shore near the ships. When they had eaten and drunk I sent two of
my company to see what manner of men the people of the place might
be, and they had a third man under them. They started at once, and
went about among the Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave
them to eat of the lotus, which was so delicious that those who ate
of it left off caring about home, and did not even want to go back
and say what had happened to them, but were for staying and munching
lotus with the Lotus-eater without thinking further of their return;
nevertheless, though they wept bitterly I forced them back to the
ships and made them fast under the benches. Then I told the rest to
go on board at once, lest any of them should taste of the lotus and
leave off wanting to get home, so they took their places and smote
the grey sea with their oars. 

"We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land
of the lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant
nor plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley,
and grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild
grapes yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. They
have no laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the
tops of high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and
they take no account of their neighbours. 

"Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not
quite close to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is
overrun with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are
never disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen- who as a rule will
suffer so much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices- do
not go there, nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it
lies a wilderness untilled and unsown from year to year, and has no
living thing upon it but only goats. For the Cyclopes have no ships,
nor yet shipwrights who could make ships for them; they cannot therefore
go from city to city, or sail over the sea to one another's country
as people who have ships can do; if they had had these they would
have colonized the island, for it is a very good one, and would yield
everything in due season. There are meadows that in some places come
right down to the sea shore, well watered and full of luscious grass;
grapes would do there excellently; there is level land for ploughing,
and it would always yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is
deep. There is a good harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet
anchors, nor need a ship be moored, but all one has to do is to beach
one's vessel and stay there till the wind becomes fair for putting
out to sea again. At the head of the harbour there is a spring of
clear water coming out of a cave, and there are poplars growing all
round it. 

"Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have
brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick
mist hung all round our ships; the moon was hidden behind a mass of
clouds so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked
for it, nor were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore
before we found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we
had beached the ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped
upon the beach till daybreak. 

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, we admired
the island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove's daughters
roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner.
On this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships,
and dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats.
Heaven sent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each
ship got nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong
day to the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill,- and we
had plenty of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full
when we sacked the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out.
While we were feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of
the Cyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble
fires. We could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating
of their sheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on
dark, we camped down upon the beach, and next morning I called a council.

"'Stay here, my brave fellows,' said I, 'all the rest of you, while
I go with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if
they are uncivilized savages, or a hospitable and humane race.'

"I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers;
so they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars.
When we got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of
a cliff near the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels. It
was a station for a great many sheep and goats, and outside there
was a large yard, with a high wall round it made of stones built into
the ground and of trees both pine and oak. This was the abode of a
huge monster who was then away from home shepherding his flocks. He
would have nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an
outlaw. He was a horrid creature, not like a human being at all, but
resembling rather some crag that stands out boldly against the sky
on the top of a high mountain. 

"I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were,
all but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself.
I also took a goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me
by Maron, Apollo son of Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron
god of Ismarus, and lived within the wooded precincts of the temple.
When we were sacking the city we respected him, and spared his life,
as also his wife and child; so he made me some presents of great value-
seven talents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars
of sweet wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a
man nor maid in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife,
and one housekeeper: when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water
to one of wine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so
exquisite that it was impossible to refrain from drinking. I filled
a large skin with this wine, and took a wallet full of provisions
with me, for my mind misgave me that I might have to deal with some
savage who would be of great strength, and would respect neither right
nor law. 

"We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went
inside and took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were
loaded with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens
could hold. They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the
hoggets, then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very
young ones all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all
the vessels, bowls, and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming
with whey. When they saw all this, my men begged me to let them first
steal some cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would
then return, drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and
sail away with them. It would have been indeed better if we had done
so but I would not listen to them, for I wanted to see the owner himself,
in the hope that he might give me a present. When, however, we saw
him my poor men found him ill to deal with. 

"We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others
of them, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with
his sheep. When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry
firewood to light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with
such a noise on to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for
fear at the far end of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove all the ewes
inside, as well as the she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving
the males, both rams and he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled
a huge stone to the mouth of the cave- so huge that two and twenty
strong four-wheeled waggons would not be enough to draw it from its
place against the doorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked
his ewes and goats, all in due course, and then let each of them have
her own young. He curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker
strainers, but the other half he poured into bowls that he might drink
it for his supper. When he had got through with all his work, he lit
the fire, and then caught sight of us, whereon he said: 

"'Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or
do you sail the as rovers, with your hands against every man, and
every man's hand against you?' 

"We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous
form, but I managed to say, 'We are Achaeans on our way home from
Troy, but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been
driven far out of our course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son
of Atreus, who has won infinite renown throughout the whole world,
by sacking so great a city and killing so many people. We therefore
humbly pray you to show us some hospitality, and otherwise make us
such presents as visitors may reasonably expect. May your excellency
fear the wrath of heaven, for we are your suppliants, and Jove takes
all respectable travellers under his protection, for he is the avenger
of all suppliants and foreigners in distress.' 

"To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, 'Stranger,' said he, 'you
are a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me,
indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes
do not care about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever
so much stronger than they. I shall not spare either yourself or your
companions out of any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for
doing so. And now tell me where you made your ship fast when you came
on shore. Was it round the point, or is she lying straight off the
land?' 

"He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in
that way, so I answered with a lie; 'Neptune,' said I, 'sent my ship
on to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We
were driven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are
with me escaped the jaws of death.' 

"The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a
sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them
down upon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains
were shed upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood.
Then he tore them limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled
them up like a lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails,
without leaving anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up
our hands to heaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not
know what else to do; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch,
and had washed down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk,
he stretched himself full length upon the ground among his sheep,
and went to sleep. I was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw
it, and drive it into his vitals, but I reflected that if I did we
should all certainly be lost, for we should never be able to shift
the stone which the monster had put in front of the door. So we stayed
sobbing and sighing where we were till morning came. 

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, he again
lit his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then
let each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with
all his work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating
them for his morning's meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled
the stone away from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once
put it back again- as easily as though he were merely clapping the
lid on to a quiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he shouted,
and cried 'Shoo, shoo,' after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain;
so I was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering
myself with glory. 

"In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows. The
Cyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens;
it was of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it
for a staff as soon as it should be dry. It was so huge that we could
only compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of large
burden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went up to this club
and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men
and told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded
to do, and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end
in the fire to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under
dung, which was lying about all over the cave, and told the men to
cast lots which of them should venture along with myself to lift it
and bore it into the monster's eye while he was asleep. The lot fell
upon the very four whom I should have chosen, and I myself made five.
In the evening the wretch came back from shepherding, and drove his
flocks into the cave- this time driving them all inside, and not leaving
any in the yards; I suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god
must have prompted him to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back
to its place against the door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his
goats all quite rightly, and then let each have her own young one;
when he had got through with all this work, he gripped up two more
of my men, and made his supper off them. So I went up to him with
an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my hands: 

"'Look here, Cyclops,' said I, you have been eating a great deal of
man's flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what
kind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as
a drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon
me and further me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping
and raving most intolerably. You ought to be ashamed yourself; how
can you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in
this way?' 

"He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste
of the wine that he begged me for another bowl full. 'Be so kind,'
he said, 'as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once.
I want to make you a present that you will be glad to have. We have
wine even in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens
them, but this drinks like nectar and ambrosia all in one.'

"I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him,
and three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when
I saw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly
as I could: 'Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give
me, therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this
is what my father and mother and my friends have always called me.'

"But the cruel wretch said, 'Then I will eat all Noman's comrades
before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the
present that I will make him.' 

As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon
him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets
of human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk.
Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and
encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When
the wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of
the fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven
had filled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the
beam into the monster's eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight
I kept turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in
a ship's plank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap
can keep on turning as long as they choose. Even thus did we bore
the red hot beam into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all
over it as we worked it round and round, so that the steam from the
burning eyeball scalded his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of
the eye sputtered in the fire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet
into cold water to temper it- for it is this that gives strength to
the iron- and it makes a great hiss as he does so, even thus did the
Cyclops' eye hiss round the beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells
made the cave ring again. We ran away in a fright, but he plucked
the beam all besmirched with gore from his eye, and hurled it from
him in a frenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did so to the other
Cyclopes who lived on the bleak headlands near him; so they gathered
from all quarters round his cave when they heard him crying, and asked
what was the matter with him. 

"'What ails you, Polyphemus,' said they, 'that you make such a noise,
breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being
able to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no
man is trying to kill you either by fraud or by force? 

"But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, 'Noman is killing
me by fraud! Noman is killing me by force!' 

"'Then,' said they, 'if no man is attacking you, you must be ill;
when Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better
pray to your father Neptune.' 

"Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my
clever stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain,
felt about with his hands till he found the stone and took it from
the door; then he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front
of it to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might
be foolish enough to attempt this. 

"As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my
own life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one
who knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great.
In the end I deemed that this plan would be the best. The male sheep
were well grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them
noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which
the wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man under the
middle sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that
there were three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram
finer than any of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back,
esconced myself in the thick wool under his belly, and flung on patiently
to his fleece, face upwards, keeping a firm hold on it all the time.

"Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came,
but when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male
sheep hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about
the pens waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting;
but their master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the
sheep as they stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out
that the men were underneath their bellies. As the ram was going out,
last of all, heavy with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty
self; Polyphemus laid hold of it and said: 

"'My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave
this morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but
lead the mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain,
and are the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last
of all. Is it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are
sorry because that wicked Noman and his horrid crew have got him down
in his drink and blinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you
could understand and talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding,
and I would dash his brains upon the ground till they flew all over
the cave. I should thus have some satisfaction for the harm a this
no-good Noman has done me.' 

"As spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way
out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram's belly,
and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat,
by constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive
them down to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of
us who had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops
had killed. However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning
that they were to hush their crying, and told them to get all the
sheep on board at once and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took
their places, and smote the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I
had got as far out as my voice would reach, I began to jeer at the
Cyclops. 

"'Cyclops,' said I, 'you should have taken better measure of your
man before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up
your visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin
would find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished
you.' 

"He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from
off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that
it was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked
as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried
us back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. But
I snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my
men by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon
they laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were
before, I was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged
and prayed of me to hold my tongue. 

"'Do not,' they exclaimed, 'be mad enough to provoke this savage creature
further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us back
again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of us;
if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have pounded
our heads and our ship's timbers into a jelly with the rugged rocks
he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.'

"But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,
'Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and
spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of
Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.' 

"On this he groaned, and cried out, 'Alas, alas, then the old prophecy
about me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a
man both brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was
an excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till
he grew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day,
and said I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses. I have been
all along expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength,
whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who has
managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; come
here, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my hospitality,
and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey- for Neptune
and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me, which
no one else neither god nor man can do.' 

"Then I said, 'I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and
sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take
more than Neptune to cure that eye of yours.' 

"On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,
saying, 'Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true-begotten
son, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must
get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight
after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man's
ship and find trouble in his house.'] 

"Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up
a rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with
prodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within a
little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock
fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards
on our way towards the shore of the island. 

"When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our
ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting
our return. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on
to the sea shore; we also landed the Cyclops' sheep, and divided them
equitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. As
for the ram, my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra
share; so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones
to Jove, who is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice, and
only thought how he might destroy my ships and my comrades.

"Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came
on dark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered
Dawn, appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then
they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so
we sailed on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death
though we had lost our comrades. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK X

Thence we went on to the Aeoli island where lives Aeolus son of Hippotas,
dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as it were)
upon the sea, iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now, Aeolus has
six daughters and six lusty sons, so he made the sons marry the daughters,
and they all live with their dear father and mother, feasting and
enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day long the atmosphere
of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats till it groans
again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their well-made bedsteads,
each with his own wife between the blankets. These were the people
among whom we had now come. 

"Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the
time about Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans.
I told him exactly how everything had happened, and when I said I
must go, and asked him to further me on my way, he made no sort of
difficulty, but set about doing so at once. Moreover, he flayed me
a prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which he shut
up in the hide as in a sack- for Jove had made him captain over the
winds, and he could stir or still each one of them according to his
own pleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly
with a silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow
from any quarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone
let blow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost
through our own folly. 

"Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native
land showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see the
stubble fires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light
sleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we
might get home the faster. On this the men fell to talking among themselves,
and said I was bringing back gold and silver in the sack that Aeolus
had given me. 'Bless my heart,' would one turn to his neighbour, saying,
'how this man gets honoured and makes friends to whatever city or
country he may go. See what fine prizes he is taking home from Troy,
while we, who have travelled just as far as he has, come back with
hands as empty as we set out with- and now Aeolus has given him ever
so much more. Quick- let us see what it all is, and how much gold
and silver there is in the sack he gave him.' 

"Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack,
whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried
us weeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke,
and knew not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and
make the best of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down
in the ship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore
our fleet back to the Aeolian island. 

"When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard
by the ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of
my men and went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him
feasting with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on
the threshold. They were astounded when they saw us and said, 'Ulysses,
what brings you here? What god has been ill-treating you? We took
great pains to further you on your way home to Ithaca, or wherever
it was that you wanted to go to.' 

"Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, 'My men have undone
me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me this
mischief, for you can if you will.' 

"I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their
father answered, 'Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the
island; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for
you come here as one abhorred of heaven. "And with these words he
sent me sorrowing from his door. 

"Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and
fruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Six
days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached
the rocky stronghold of Lamus- Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians,
where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked]
salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last answers
the salute. In that country a man who could do without sleep might
earn double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle, and another as a shepherd,
for they work much the same by night as they do by day. 

"When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep cliffs,
with a narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains took all
their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for there
was never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was always dead
calm. I kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at the very
end of the point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoitre, but could
see no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising from
the ground. So I sent two of my company with an attendant to find
out what sort of people the inhabitants were. 

"The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the
people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till
presently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch water,
and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was
going to the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their
water, and when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who
the king of that country might be, and over what kind of people he
ruled; so she directed them to her father's house, but when they got
there they found his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain,
and they were horrified at the sight of her. 

"She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly,
and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them,
and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other
two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates
raised a hue and cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians
sprang up from every quarter- ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks
at us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard
the horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and
the death cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians speared them like
fishes and took them home to eat them. While they were thus killing
my men within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own
ship, and told my men to row with alf their might if they too would
not fare like the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were
thankful enough when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks
they hurled at us. As for the others there was not one of them left.

"Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we
had lost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe
lives a great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician
Aeetes- for they are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter
to Oceanus. We brought our ship into a safe harbour without a word,
for some god guided us thither, and having landed we there for two
days and two nights, worn out in body and mind. When the morning of
the third day came I took my spear and my sword, and went away from
the ship to reconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human
handiwork, or hear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of a high
look-out I espied the smoke of Circe's house rising upwards amid a
dense forest of trees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having
seen the smoke, I would not go on at once and find out more, but in
the end I deemed it best to go back to the ship, give the men their
dinners, and send some of them instead of going myself. 

"When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my
solitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my
path. He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the
river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck
him in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went
clean through him, and he lay groaning in the dust until the life
went out of him. Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the
wound, and laid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and
twisted them into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I
bound the four feet of the noble creature together; having so done
I hung him round my neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon
my spear, for the stag was much too big for me to be able to carry
him on my shoulder, steadying him with one hand. As I threw him down
in front of the ship, I called the men and spoke cheeringly man by
man to each of them. 'Look here my friends,' said I, 'we are not going
to die so much before our time after all, and at any rate we will
not starve so long as we have got something to eat and drink on board.'
On this they uncovered their heads upon the sea shore and admired
the stag, for he was indeed a splendid fellow. Then, when they had
feasted their eyes upon him sufficiently, they washed their hands
and began to cook him for dinner. 

"Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed
there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and
it came on dark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning,
fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, 'My friends,
we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have
no idea where the sun either sets or rises, so that we do not even
know East from West. I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must
try and find one. We are certainly on an island, for I went as high
as I could this morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to
the horizon; it lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising
from out of a thick forest of trees.' 

"Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they
had been treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage
ogre Polyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was
nothing to be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies
and set a captain over each; I gave one company to Eurylochus, while
I took command of the other myself. Then we cast lots in a helmet,
and the lot fell upon Eurylochus; so he set out with his twenty-two
men, and they wept, as also did we who were left behind.

"When they reached Circe's house they found it built of cut stones,
on a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest.
There were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it- poor
bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged
into subjection. They did not attack my men, but wagged their great
tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against them.
As hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming from dinner-
for they know he will bring them something- even so did these wolves
and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the men were
terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures. Presently they
reached the gates of the goddess's house, and as they stood there
they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as she worked
at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such dazzling colours
as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites, whom I valued
and trusted more than any other of my men, said, 'There is some one
inside working at a loom and singing most beautifully; the whole place
resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she is woman or
goddess.' 

"They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade
them enter. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus,
who suspected mischief and stayed outside. When she had got them into
her house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess
with cheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian but she drugged it with wicked
poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she
turned them into pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in
her pigsties. They were like pigs-head, hair, and all, and they grunted
just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they
remembered everything. 

"Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some
acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back
to tell me about the sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome
with dismay that though he tried to speak he could find no words to
do so; his eyes filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh,
till at last we forced his story out of him, and he told us what had
happened to the others. 

"'We went,' said he, as you told us, through the forest, and in the
middle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a place
that could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else she was
a goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted
to her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door,
and invited us in. The others did not suspect any mischief so they
followed her into the house, but I stayed where I was, for I thought
there might be some treachery. From that moment I saw them no more,
for not one of them ever came out, though I sat a long time watching
for them.' 

"Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I
also took my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and show
me the way. But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously,
saying, 'Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here,
for I know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even
return alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any
rate with the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.'

"'Stay where you are, then, 'answered I, 'eating and drinking at the
ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.'

"With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through
the charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress
Circe, I met Mercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man
in the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon
his face. He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying,
'My poor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top,
alone and without knowing the way? Your men are shut up in Circe's
pigsties, like so many wild boars in their lairs. You surely do not
fancy that you can set them free? I can tell you that you will never
get back and will have to stay there with the rest of them. But never
mind, I will protect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take
this herb, which is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when
you go to Circe's house, it will be a talisman to you against every
kind of mischief. 

"'And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will
try to practise upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and
she will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be
able to charm you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you
will prevent her spells from working. I will tell you all about it.
When Circe strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon
her as though you were goings to kill her. She will then be frightened
and will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point
blank refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and
to take good care also of yourself, but you make her swear solemnly
by all the blessed that she will plot no further mischief against
you, or else when she has got you naked she will unman you and make
you fit for nothing.' 

"As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground an showed me what
it was like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as
milk; the gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but
the gods can do whatever they like. 

"Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island;
but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded
with care as I walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there
and called the goddess, and as soon as she heard me she came down,
opened the door, and asked me to come in; so I followed her- much
troubled in my mind. She set me on a richly decorated seat inlaid
with silver, there was a footstool also under my feet, and she mixed
a mess in a golden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it, for
she meant me mischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk it
without its charming me, she struck she, struck me with her wand.
'There now,' she cried, 'be off to the pigsty, and make your lair
with the rest of them.' 

"But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her,
whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke piteously,
saying, 'Who and whence are you? from what place and people have you
come? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you? Never
yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I gave
you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than the
bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always said would come here some day
with his ship while on his way home form Troy; so be it then; sheathe
your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn
to trust each other.' 

"And I answered, 'Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with
you when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now
that you have got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask
me to go to bed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing.
I shall certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will
first take your solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.'

"So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed
her oath then I went to bed with her. 

"Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their
work. They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the
holy waters that run down into the sea. One of them spread a fair
purple cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it. Another
brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets
of gold. A third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl
and put golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth she brought
in water and set it to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which
she had lighted. When the water in the cauldron was boiling, she poured
cold into it till it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in
a bath and began washing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders,
to take the tire and stiffness out of my limbs. As soon as she had
done washing me and anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good
cloak and shirt and led me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with
silver; there was a footstool also under my feet. A maid servant then
brought me water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver
basin for me to wash my hands, and she drew a clean table beside me;
an upper servant brought me bread and offered me many things of what
there was in the house, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not,
and sat without heeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.

"When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief,
she came to me and said, 'Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though
you were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and
drink? Is it that you are still suspicious? You ought not to be, for
I have already sworn solemnly that I will not hurt you.'

"And I said, 'Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can think
of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his
friends free and let him see them. If you want me to eat and drink,
you must free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with
my own eyes.' 

"When I had said this she went straight through the court with her
wand in her hand and opened the pigsty doors. My men came out like
so many prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among
them and anointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that
the bad drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger
than they were before, and much taller and better looking. They knew
me at once, seized me each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till
the whole house was filled with the sound of their hullabalooing,
and Circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to me and
said, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where
you have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide
all your ship's gear and property in some cave, and come back here
with your men.' 

"I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the
men at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw
me the silly blubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves
break out and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming
home to be milked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead
resounds with their lowing. They seemed as glad to see me as though
they had got back to their own rugged Ithaca, where they had been
born and bred. 'Sir,' said the affectionate creatures, 'we are as
glad to see you back as though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but
tell us all about the fate of our comrades.' 

"I spoke comfortingly to them and said, 'We must draw our ship on
to the land, and hide the ship's gear with all our property in some
cave; then come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe's house,
where you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst
of great abundance.' 

"On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried
to hold them back and said, 'Alas, poor wretches that we are, what
will become of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of
Circe, who will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall
have to keep guard over her house. Remember how the Cyclops treated
us when our comrades went inside his cave, and Ulysses with them.
It was all through his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.'

"When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen
blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of
his being a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him
and said, 'Sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind
the ship, but take the rest of us with you to Circe's house.'

"On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind after
all, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand
that I had given him. 

"Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind
were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them woollen
cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all comfortably
at dinner in her house. As soon as the men saw each other face to
face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud till
the whole palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up to me and said,
'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off crying;
I know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you
have fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now,
so stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and
hearty as you were when you left Ithaca; for at present you are weakened
both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the hardships-
you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no more cheerfulness
left in you.' 

"Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a whole
twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine.
But when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days
had come round, my men called me apart and said, 'Sir, it is time
you began to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared
to see your house and native country at all.' 

"Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong
day to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine,
but when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves
down to sleep in the covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got
into bed with Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened
to what I had got to say. 'Circe,' said I, 'please to keep the promise
you made me about furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get
back and so do my men, they are always pestering me with their complaints
as soon as ever your back is turned.' 

"And the goddess answered, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall
none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there
is another journey which you have got to take before you can sail
homewards. You must go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine
to consult the ghost of the blind Theban prophet Teiresias whose reason
is still unshaken. To him alone has Proserpine left his understanding
even in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.'

"I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and would
gladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently
when I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, 'And
who shall guide me upon this voyage- for the house of Hades is a port
that no ship can reach.' 

"'You will want no guide,' she answered; 'raise you mast, set your
white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there
of itself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you
will reach the fertile shore of Proserpine's country with its groves
of tall poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach
your ship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark
abode of Hades. You will find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon
and Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron,
and you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers
run into one another. 

"'When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench
a cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a
drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then
wine, and in the third place water-sprinkling white barley meal over
the whole. Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble
ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to Ithaca you will
sacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load
the pyre with good things. More particularly you must promise that
Teiresias shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all
your flocks. 

"'When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers,
offer them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus;
but yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards
the river. On this, many dead men's ghosts will come to you, and you
must tell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed,
and offer them as a burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades and to Proserpine.
Then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any other poor
ghost from coming near the split blood before Teiresias shall have
answered your questions. The seer will presently come to you, and
will tell you about your voyage- what stages you are to make, and
how you are to sail the see so as to reach your home.' 

"It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed
me in my shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful light
gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle
round her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle. Then I went
about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly
to each of them man by man: 'You must not lie sleeping here any longer,'
said I to them, 'we must be going, for Circe has told me all about
it.' And this they did as I bade them. 

"Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We
had with us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for
sense or courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top
away from the rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool.
When he heard the noise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on
a sudden and forgot all about coming down by the main staircase, so
he tumbled right off the roof and broke his neck, and his soul went
down to the house of Hades. 

"When I had got the men together I said to them, 'You think you are
about to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead
of this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to
consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.' 

"The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves
on the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend
matters by crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting
our fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast
hard by the ship. She passed through the midst of us without our knowing
it, for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does
not wish to be seen? 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XI

Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into
the water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep
on board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind.
Circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew
dead aft and stayed steadily with us keeping our sails all the time
well filled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship's gear and
let her go as the wind and helmsman headed her. All day long her sails
were full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went
down and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters
of the river Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians
who live enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun
never pierce neither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of
the heavens, but the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night.
When we got there we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her,
and went along by the waters of Oceanus till we came to the place
of which Circe had told us. 

"Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword
and dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all
the dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with
water, and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying earnestly
to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when I got back
to Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best I had,
and would load the pyre with good things. I also particularly promised
that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the best in all
my flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut the throats
of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon the
ghosts came trooping up from Erebus- brides, young bachelors, old
men worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave
men who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched
with blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trench
with a strange kind of screaming sound that made me turn pale with
fear. When I saw them coming I told the men to be quick and flay the
carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them,
and at the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and to Proserpine;
but I sat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor
feckless ghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered
my questions. 

"The first ghost 'that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he
had not yet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked
and unburied in Circe's house, for we had had too much else to do.
I was very sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: 'Elpenor,' said
I, 'how did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have
here on foot quicker than I have with my ship.' 

"'Sir,' he answered with a groan, 'it was all bad luck, and my own
unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe's
house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase
but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul down to
the house of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have
left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father
who brought you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is
the one hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that
when you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean
island. Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you,
or I may bring heaven's anger upon you; but burn me with whatever
armour I have, build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell
people in days to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant
over my grave the oar I used to row with when I was yet alive and
with my messmates.' And I said, 'My poor fellow, I will do all that
you have asked of me.' 

"Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the
one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the
ghost of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then
came the ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus.
I had left her alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears
when I saw her, but even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her
come near the blood till I had asked my questions of Teiresias.

"Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre
in his hand. He knew me and said, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes,
why, poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit
the dead in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw
your sword that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions
truly.' 

"So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank
of the blood he began with his prophecy. 

"You want to know,' said he, 'about your return home, but heaven will
make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye
of Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
blinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you
can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging
to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave these
flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may
yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I
forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men.
Even though you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight
after losing all your men, [in another man's ship, and you will find
trouble in your house, which will be overrun by high-handed people,
who are devouring your substance under the pretext of paying court
and making presents to your wife. 

"'When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you
must take a well-made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to
a country where the people have never heard of the sea and do not
even mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships,
and oars that are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certain
token which cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you and
will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your
shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice
a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune. Then go home and offer hecatombs
to an the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death
shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very
gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people
shall bless you. All that I have said will come true].' 

"'This,' I answered, 'must be as it may please heaven, but tell me
and tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother's ghost close by
us; she is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though
I am her own son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me,
Sir, how I can make her know me.' 

"'That,' said he, 'I can soon do Any ghost that you let taste of the
blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not
let them have any blood they will go away again.' 

"On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for
his prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was
until my mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at
once and spoke fondly to me, saying, 'My son, how did you come down
to this abode of darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard
thing for the living to see these places, for between us and them
there are great and terrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no
man can cross on foot, but he must have a good ship to take him. Are
you all this time trying to find your way home from Troy, and have
you never yet got back to Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?'

"'Mother,' said I, 'I was forced to come here to consult the ghost
of the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean
land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but
one long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set
out with Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the
Trojans. But tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did
you have a long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy
passage to eternity? Tell me also about my father, and the son whom
I left behind me; is my property still in their hands, or has some
one else got hold of it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim
it? Tell me again what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she
is; does she live with my son and guard my estate securely, or has
she made the best match she could and married again?' 

"My mother answered, 'Your wife still remains in your house, but she
is in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both
night and day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property,
and Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain
largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a magistrate,
and how every one invites him; your father remains at his old place
in the country and never goes near the town. He has no comfortable
bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in front of
the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in summer, when
the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the vineyard on a
bed of vine leaves thrown anyhow upon the ground. He grieves continually
about your never having come home, and suffers more and more as he
grows older. As for my own end it was in this wise: heaven did not
take me swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was I attacked
by any illness such as those that generally wear people out and kill
them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force of
my affection for you- this it was that was the death of me.'

"Then I tried to find some way of embracing my mother's ghost. Thrice
I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each time
she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and being
touched to the quick I said to her, 'Mother, why do you not stay still
when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around one another
we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in the
house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of
grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?' 

"'My son,' she answered, 'most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when
they are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together;
these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has
left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream.
Now, however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and
note all these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.'

"Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
wives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds
about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.
In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood
at once. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned
her told me her race and lineage. 

"The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife
of Cretheus the son of Aeolus. She fell in love with the river Enipeus
who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when
she was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as
her lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue
wave arched itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and
god, whereon he loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber.
When the god had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in
his own and said, 'Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of
the gods are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this
time twelve months. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now
go home, but hold your tongue and do not tell any one.' 

"Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and
Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias
was a great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived
in Pylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson,
Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.

"Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of
having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two
sons Amphion and Zethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates,
and built a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could
not hold Thebes till they had walled it. 

"Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove
indomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon,
and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon. 

"I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king OEdipodes whose awful lot
it was to marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her
after having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole
story to the world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief
for the spite the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house
of the mighty jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the
avenging spirits haunted him as for an outraged mother- to his ruing
bitterly thereafter. 

"Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given
priceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son
of Iasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She
bore Nestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously
lovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus
would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles
from the grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task. The
only man who would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent
seer, but the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the
cattle caught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full
year had passed and the same season came round again, Iphicles set
him at liberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven.
Thus, then, was the will of Jove accomplished. 

"And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,
Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these
heroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for
by a special dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again,
each one of them every other day throughout all time, and they have
the rank of gods. 

"After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace
of Neptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short
lived. They were the finest children that were ever born in this world,
and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they
were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest.
They threatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to
set Mount Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the
top of Ossa, that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have
done it too if they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed
both of them, before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their
cheeks or chin. 

"Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the
magician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens,
but he did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her
in the island of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her.

"I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own
husband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name
every single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw,
and it is time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew,
or here. As for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it."

Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
throughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:

"What do you think of this man, O Phaecians? Is he not tall and good
looking, and is he not Clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of
you share in the distinction. Do not he a hurry to send him away,
nor niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great
need, for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance."

Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among
them, "My friends," said he, "what our august queen has just said
to us is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded
by it; but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with
King Alcinous." 

"The thing shall be done," exclaimed Alcinous, "as surely as I still
live and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious
to get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,
by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I
mean to give him. As regards- his escort it will be a matter for you
all, and mine above all others as the chief person among you."

And Ulysses answered, "King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay
here for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded
with your noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound
greatly to my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my own
people, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see
me when I get back to Ithaca." 

"Ulysses," replied Alcinous, "not one of us who sees you has any idea
that you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many people
going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to
see through them, but there is a style about your language which assures
me of your good disposition. Moreover you have told the story of your
own misfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practised
bard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty
heroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perished
there. The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet
bed time- go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay
here listening till to-morrow morning, so long as you will continue
to tell us of your adventures." 

"Alcinous," answered Ulysses, "there is a time for making speeches,
and a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I
will not refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of
my comrades who did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished
on their return, through the treachery of a wicked woman.

"When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions,
the ghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up tome, surrounded
by those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon
as he had tasted the blood he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched
out his arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor
substance any more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him.
'How did you come by your death,' said I, 'King Agamemnon? Did Neptune
raise his winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did
your enemies make an end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting
or sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their
wives and city?' 

"'Ulysses,' he answered, 'noble son of Laertes, was not lost at sea
in any storm of Neptune's raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon
the mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me
between them. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered
me most miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house,
while all around me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for
the wedding breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great
nobleman. You must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general
engagement, or in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly
pitiable as the way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing-bowl
and the loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with
our-blood. I heard Priam's daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra
killed her close beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with the sword
in my body, and raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but
she slipped away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my
eyes when I was dying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel
and so shameless as a woman when she has fallen into such guilt as
hers was. Fancy murdering her own husband! I thought I was going to
be welcomed home by my children and my servants, but her abominable
crime has brought disgrace on herself and all women who shall come
after- even on the good ones.' 

"And I said, 'In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first
to last in the matter of their women's counsels. See how many of us
fell for Helen's sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched
mischief against too during your absence.' 

"'Be sure, therefore,' continued Agamemnon, 'and not be too friendly
even with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectly
well yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel about
the rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for
Penelope is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. We
left her a young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out
for Troy. This child no doubt is now grown up happily to man's estate,
and he and his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one another
as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not even
allow me the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I
could do so. Furthermore I say- and lay my saying to your heart- do
not tell people when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal
a march upon them, for after all this there is no trusting women.
But now tell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news of my
son Orestes? Is he in Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta
with Menelaus- for I presume that he is still living.' 

"And I said, 'Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether
your son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does
not know.' 

"As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the
ghost of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax
who was the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the
son of Peleus. The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously,
saying, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will you
undertake next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among
us silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?'

"And I said, 'Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans,
I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me about my
return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get near
the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been
in trouble all the time. As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet
so fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored
by all us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are
here you are a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take
it so much to heart even if you are dead.' 

"'Say not a word,' he answered, 'in death's favour; I would rather
be a paid servant in a poor man's house and be above ground than king
of kings among the dead. But give me news about son; is he gone to
the wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me
also if you have heard anything about my father Peleus- does he still
rule among the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout
Hellas and Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could
I but stand by his side, in the light of day, with the same strength
that I had when I killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of
Troy- could I but be as I then was and go even for a short time to
my father's house, any one who tried to do him violence or supersede
him would soon me it.' 

"'I have heard nothing,' I answered, 'of Peleus, but I can tell you
all about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from
Scyros with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was
always first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and
I were the only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting
on the plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men,
but would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many
a man did he kill in battle- I cannot name every single one of those
whom he slew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only
say how he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who
was the handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also
of the Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman's bribes. Moreover,
when all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus
had made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open
the door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders
and chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking
in every limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from
his cheek; he was all the time urging me to break out from the horse-
grasping the handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing
fury against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he
got his handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such
is the fortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown
spear nor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great
chance.' 

"When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across
a meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning
the prowess of his son. 

"The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own
melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof-
still angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about
the armour of Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the
Trojan prisoners and Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never
gained the day in such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who
was foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in
stature and prowess. 

"When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, 'Ajax, will you not
forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
hateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough
to lose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you
as much as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the
blame be laid on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against
the Danaans, for it was this that made him counsel your destruction-
come hither, therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and
hear what I can tell you.' 

"He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts;
nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being
so angry, or I should have gone talking to him, only that there were
still others among the dead whom I desired to see. 

"Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his
sentences upon them. 

"After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the
ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and
he had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.

"And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering
some nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were
digging their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat
them off with his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove's
mistress Leto as she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.

"I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that
reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink,
it dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground-
parched by the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that
shed their fruit over his head- pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet
figs and juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out
his hand to take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to
the clouds. 

"And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
with both his hands. With hands and feet he' tried to roll it up to
the top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over
on to the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the
pitiless stone would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then
he would begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran
off him and the steam rose after him. 

"After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for
he is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to
wife, who is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming
round him like scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as
night with his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string,
glaring around as though ever on the point of taking aim. About his
breast there was a wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous
fashion with bears, wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there
was also war, battle, and death. The man who made that belt, do what
he might, would never be able to make another like it. Hercules knew
me at once when he saw me, and spoke piteously, saying, my poor Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, are you too leading the same sorry kind of life
that I did when I was above ground? I was son of Jove, but I went
through an infinity of suffering, for I became bondsman to one who
was far beneath me- a low fellow who set me all manner of labours.
He once sent me here to fetch the hell-hound- for he did not think
he could find anything harder for me than this, but I got the hound
out of Hades and brought him to him, for Mercury and Minerva helped
me.' 

"On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed
where I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom
I would fain have seen- Theseus and Pirithous glorious children of
the gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered
such appalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should
send up from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon.
On this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board
at once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,
whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We had
to row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XII

"After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the
open sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there
is dawn and sunrise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to
the sands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep
and waited till day should break. 

"Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I
sent some men to Circe's house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut
firewood from a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and
after we had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral
rites. When his body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised
a cairn, set a stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed
the oar that he had been used to row with. 

"While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back
from the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as
she could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread,
meat, and wine. Then she stood in the midst of us and said, 'You have
done a bold thing in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you
will have died twice, to other people's once; now, then, stay here
for the rest of the day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage
at daybreak tomorrow morning. In the meantime I will tell Ulysses
about your course, and will explain everything to him so as to prevent
your suffering from misadventure either by land or sea.'

"We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong
day to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it
came on dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables
of the ship. Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated
away from the others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all
about our adventures. 

"'So far so good,' said she, when I had ended my story, 'and now pay
attention to what I am about to tell you- heaven itself, indeed, will
recall it to your recollection. First you will come to the Sirens
who enchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in too
close and hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will
never welcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble
him to death with the sweetness of their song. There is a great heap
of dead men's bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting
off them. Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men's ears
with wax that none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen
yourself, for you may get the men to bind you as you stand upright
on a cross-piece half way up the mast, and they must lash the rope's
ends to the mast itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening.
If you beg and pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you
faster. 

"'When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give you
coherent directions as to which of two courses you are to take; I
will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them
for yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against
which the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the
blessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird
may pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father
Jove, but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father
Jove has to send another to make up their number; no ship that ever
yet came to these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds
of fire are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men.
The only vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo
on her way from the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against
these great rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love
she bore to Jason. 

"'Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in
a dark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear
not even in summer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands
and twenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs
sheer up, as smooth as though it had been polished. In the middle
of it there is a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus;
you must take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that
not even the stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. Inside it
Scylla sits and yelps with a voice that you might take to be that
of a young hound, but in truth she is a dreadful monster and no one-
not even a god- could face her without being terror-struck. She has
twelve mis-shapen feet, and six necks of the most prodigious length;
and at the end of each neck she has a frightful head with three rows
of teeth in each, all set very close together, so that they would
crunch any one to death in a moment, and she sits deep within her
shady cell thrusting out her heads and peering all round the rock,
fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any larger monster that she can
catch, of the thousands with which Amphitrite teems. No ship ever
yet got past her without losing some men, for she shoots out all her
heads at once, and carries off a man in each mouth. 

"'You will find the other rocks lie lower, but they are so close together
that there is not more than a bowshot between them. [A large fig tree
in full leaf grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking whirlpool
of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth her waters,
and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not there
when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could not save
you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you
can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.'

"'Is there no way,' said I, 'of escaping Charybdis, and at the same
time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?'

"'You dare-devil,' replied the goddess, you are always wanting to
fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even
by the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,
extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your
best chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if
you dawdle about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she
may catch you with a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another
half dozen of your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed,
and roar out lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla's dam, bad luck to
her; she will then stop her from making a second raid upon you.

"'You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see
many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god-
seven herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in
each flock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number,
and they are tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are
children of the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera. Their mother when she
had borne them and had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian
island, which was a long way off, to live there and look after their
father's flocks and herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and
think of nothing but getting home, you may yet after much hardship
reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction
both of your ship and of your comrades; and even though you may yourself
escape, you will return late, in bad plight, after losing all your
men.' 

"Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,
whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men
to loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her,
took their places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars.
Presently the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a
fair wind that blew dead aft, and stayed steadily with us, keeping
our sails well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship's
gear, and let her go as wind and helmsman headed her. 

"Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, 'My friends,
it is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies
that Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that
whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she
said we were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully
in a field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long
as no one else did. Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece
half way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast
that I cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope's ends to the
mast itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more
tightly still.' 

"I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached
the island of the two Sirens, for the wind had been very favourable.
Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of
wind nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and
stowed them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with
the foam they raised in rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of
wax and cut it up small with my sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my
strong hands till it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading
and the rays of the sun-god son of Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears
of all my men, and they bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood
upright on the crosspiece; but they went on rowing themselves. When
we had got within earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a
good rate, the Sirens saw that we were getting in shore and began
with their singing. 

"'Come here,' they sang, 'renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean
name, and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past us without
staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song- and he who listens
will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the
ills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy,
and can tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole
world.' 

"They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear them
further I made by frowning to my men that they should set me free;
but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes bound
me with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of the
Sirens' voices. Then my men took the wax from their ears and unbound
me. 

"Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave from
which spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men
were so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole
sea resounded with the rushing of the waters, but the ship stayed
where it was, for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore,
and exhorted them man by man not to lose heart. 

"'My friends,' said I, 'this is not the first time that we have been
in danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclops
shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel
saved us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well.
Now, therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with
might and main. As for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend
to them, for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these
steaming rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and
be over yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the
death of us.' 

"So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monster
Scylla, for I knew the men would not on rowing if I did, but would
huddle together in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe's
strict instructions- I put on my armour. Then seizing two strong spears
I took my stand on the ship Is bows, for it was there that I expected
first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much
harm; but I could not make her out anywhere, though I strained my
eyes with looking the gloomy rock all over and over 

"Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one
hand was Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up
the salt water. As she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron
when it is boiling over upon a great fire, and the spray reached the
top of the rocks on either side. When she began to suck again, we
could see the water all inside whirling round and round, and it made
a deafening sound as it broke against the rocks. We could see the
bottom of the whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were
at their wit's ends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and
were expecting each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly
upon us and snatched up my six best men. I was looking at once after
both ship and men, and in a moment I saw their hands and feet ever
so high above me, struggling in the air as Scylla was carrying them
off, and I heard them call out my name in one last despairing cry.
As a fisherman, seated, spear in hand, upon some jutting rock throws
bait into the water to deceive the poor little fishes, and spears
them with the ox's horn with which his spear is shod, throwing them
gasping on to the land as he catches them one by one- even so did
Scylla land these panting creatures on her rock and munch them up
at the mouth of her den, while they screamed and stretched out their
hands to me in their mortal agony. This was the most sickening sight
that I saw throughout all my voyages. 

"When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terrible
Charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were
the goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still
at sea in my ship I could bear the cattle lowing as they came home
to the yards, and the sheep bleating. Then I remembered what the blind
Theban prophet Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe
had warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. So being
much troubled I said to the men, 'My men, I know you are hard pressed,
but listen while I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and
how carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessed
sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie.
Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.' 

"The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me an
insolent answer. 'Ulysses,' said he, 'you are cruel; you are very
strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron,
and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep,
you will not let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon
this island, but bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly
on through the watches of the flying night. It is by night that the
winds blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should
one of those sudden squalls spring up from South West or West, which
so often wreck a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious?
Now, therefore, let us obey the of night and prepare our supper here
hard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and
put out to sea.' 

"Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw that
heaven meant us a mischief and said, 'You force me to yield, for you
are many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his
solemn oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock
of sheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of either,
but will be satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.'

"They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their
oath we made the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of
fresh water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. As
soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about
their poor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set
them weeping and they went on crying till they fell off into a sound
sleep. 

"In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their
places, Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so
that land and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang
forth out of the heavens. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered
Dawn, appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave
wherein the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I called
the men together in council. 

"'My friends,' said I, 'we have meat and drink in the ship, let us
mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for
it; for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees
and gives ear to everything. And again they promised that they would
obey. 

"For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there
was no other wind, but only South and East. As long as corn and wine
held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when,
however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced
to go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking
whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. One
day, therefore, I went up inland that I might pray heaven to show
me some means of getting away. When I had gone far enough to be clear
of all my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from
the wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus
till by and by they sent me off into a sweet sleep. 

"Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, 'Listen
to me,' said he, 'my poor comrades. All deaths are bad enough but
there is none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in the best
of these cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal Rods? If
we ever get back to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god
and enrich it with every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined
to sink our ship out of revenge for these homed cattle, and the other
gods are of the same mind, I for one would rather drink salt water
once for all and have done with it, than be starved to death by inches
in such a desert island as this is.' 

"Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle,
so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men, therefore
drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them saying their
prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of barley-meal, for there
was no barley left. When they had done praying they killed the cows
and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the thigh bones, wrapped
them round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on
top of them. They had no wine with which to make drink-offerings over
the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept pouring on a little
water from time to time while the inward meats were being grilled;
then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had tasted the inward
meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces upon the spits.

"By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the
ship and to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast
meat, so I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. 'Father Jove,'
I exclaimed, 'and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss,
you have done me a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have
sent me; see what fine work these men of mine have been making in
my absence.' 

"Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had
been killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said
to the immortals, 'Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in
everlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses' ship:
they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing
I loved to look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again.
If they do not square accounts with me about my cows, I will go down
to Hades and shine there among the dead.' 

"'Sun,' said Jove, 'go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over
the fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieces with
a bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.'

"I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the
mouth of Mercury. 

"As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each
one of the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for
the cows were dead already. And indeed the gods began at once to show
signs and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about,
and the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat,
whether cooked or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do.

"For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon
them, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the
fury of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts,
spread sail, and put out to sea. As soon as we were well away from
the island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Saturn
raised a black cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath
it. We not get on much further, for in another moment we were caught
by a terrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays of the
mast so that it fell aft, while all the ship's gear tumbled about
at the bottom of the vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman
in the ship's stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to
pieces, and he fell overboard as though he were diving, with no more
life left in him. 

"Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round
and round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning
struck it. The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about
in the water round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the
god presently deprived them of all chance of getting home again.

"I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel
(which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in
the direction of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong
still hanging about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together,
and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to
take me. 

"[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got
into the South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back
to the terrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actually
happened, for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise
had reacfied the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool. She was then sucking
down the salt sea water, but I was carried aloft toward the fig tree,
which I caught hold of and clung on to like a bat. I could not plant
my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a long
way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too high,
too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung patiently
on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft again-
and a very long while it seemed. A juryman is not more glad to get
home to supper, after having been long detained in court by troublesome
cases, than I was to see my raft beginning to work its way out of
the whirlpool again. At last I let go with my hands and feet, and
fell heavily into the sea, bard by my raft on to which I then got,
and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father of gods
and men would not let her get further sight of me- otherwise I should
have certainly been lost.] 

"Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the
gods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and
powerful goddess Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I
need say no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all
about it yesterday, and I hate saying the same thing over and over
again." 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIII

Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered
cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous
began to speak. 

"Ulysses," said he, "now that you have reached my house I doubt not
you will get home without further misadventure no matter how much
you have suffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here
night after night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard,
I would insist as follows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes,
wrought gold, and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance;
let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a
large tripod and a cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the levy
of a general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear
the burden of such a handsome present." 

Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in
his own abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared,
they hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them.
Alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under
the ship's benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the
rowers. Then they went to the house of Alcinous to get dinner, and
he sacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jove who is the lord of
all. They set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after
which the inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite with every
one, sang to them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the
sun, as though to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on
his way. As one who has been all day ploughing a fallow field with
a couple of oxen keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when
night comes that he may go and get it, for it is all his legs can
do to carry him, even so did Ulysses rejoice when the sun went down,
and he at once said to the Phaecians, addressing himself more particularly
to King Alcinous: 

"Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send
me on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart's desire by
giving me an escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that
I may turn to good account; may I find my admirable wife living in
peace among friends, and may you whom I leave behind me give satisfaction
to your wives and children; may heaven vouchsafe you every good grace,
and may no evil thing come among your people." 

Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying and
agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably.
Alcinous therefore said to his servant, "Pontonous, mix some wine
and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to father
Jove, and speed our guest upon his way." 

Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others
each from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that
live in heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the
hands of queen Arete. 

"Farewell, queen," said he, "henceforward and for ever, till age and
death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now
take my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people,
and with king Alcinous." 

As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to conduct
him to his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent some maid servants
with him- one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to carry his strong-box,
and a third with corn and wine. When they got to the water side the
crew took these things and put them on board, with all the meat and
drink; but for Ulysses they spread a rug and a linen sheet on deck
that he might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship. Then he too
went on board and lay down without a word, but the crew took every
man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone to which
it had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea, Ulysses
fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber. 

The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies
over the course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curveted as
it were the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water
seethed in her wake. She held steadily on her course, and even a falcon,
swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. Thus, then,
she cut her way through the water. carrying one who was as cunning
as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of all
that he had suffered both on the field of battle and by the waves
of the weary sea. 

When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show.
the ship drew near to land. Now there is in Ithaca a haven of the
old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line
of the sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms
of wind and sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a
ship may lie without being even moored. At the head of this harbour
there is a large olive tree, and at no distance a fine overarching
cavern sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads. There are mixing-bowls
within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover,
there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes
of sea purple- very curious to see- and at all times there is water
within it. It has two entrances, one facing North by which mortals
can go down into the cave, while the other comes from the South and
is more mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the
way taken by the gods. 

Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the place,
She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length on to
the shore; when, however, they had landed, the first thing they did
was to lift Ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the ship,
and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. Then they took out
the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to give him
when he was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these all
together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear
some passer by might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and
then they made the best of their way home again. 

But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already threatened
Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove. "Father Jove," said he, "I
shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods, if
mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show
such small regard for me. I said I would Ulysses get home when he
had suffered sufficiently. I did not say that he should never get
home at all, for I knew you had already nodded your head about it,
and promised that he should do so; but now they have brought him in
a ship fast asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading him
with more magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he
would ever have brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of
the spoil and got home without misadventure." 

And Jove answered, "What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talking
about? The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would
be monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are.
As regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence
and treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself
to deal with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please."

"I should have done so at once," replied Neptune, "if I were not anxious
to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, I should
like to wreck the Phaecian ship as it is returning from its escort.
This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I should
also like to bury their city under a huge mountain." 

"My good friend," answered Jove, "I should recommend you at the very
moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her
way, to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship.
This will astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under
the mountain." 

When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where
the Phaecians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making
rapid way, had got close-in. Then he went up to it, turned it into
stone, and drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it
in the ground. After this he went away. 

The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would
turn towards his neighbour, saying, "Bless my heart, who is it that
can have rooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port?
We could see the whole of her only moment ago." 

This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous
said, "I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said that
Neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over
the sea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning
from an escort, and bury our city under a high mountain. This was
what my old father used to say, and now it is all coming true. Now
therefore let us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave
off giving people escorts when they come here, and in the next let
us sacrifice twelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy
upon us, and not bury our city under the high mountain." When the
people heard this they were afraid and got ready the bulls.

Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaecians to king Neptune, standing
round his altar; and at the same time Ulysses woke up once more upon
his own soil. He had been so long away that he did not know it again;
moreover, Jove's daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, so that
people might not know of his having come, and that she might tell
him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens and
friends recognizing him until he had taken his revenge upon the wicked
suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to him- the
long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the goodly
trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his native
land. So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and cried
aloud despairingly. 

"Alas," he exclaimed, "among what manner of people am I fallen? Are
they savage and uncivilized or hospitable and humane? Where shall
I put all this treasure, and which way shall I go? I wish I had stayed
over there with the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other
great chief who would have been good to me and given me an escort.
As it is I do not know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave
it here for fear somebody else should get hold of it. In good truth
the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly
by me, and have left me in the wrong country; they said they would
take me back to Ithaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protector
of suppliants chastise them, for he watches over everybody and punishes
those who do wrong. Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see
if the crew have gone off with any of them." 

He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his
clothes, but there was nothing missing; still he kept grieving about
not being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore
of the sounding sea bewailing his hard fate. Then Minerva came up
to him disguised as a young shepherd of delicate and princely mien,
with a good cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals
on her comely feet and held a javelin in her hand. Ulysses was glad
when he saw her, and went straight up to her. 

"My friend," said he, "you are the first person whom I have met with
in this country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be will disposed
towards me. Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace
your knees and pray to you as though you were a god. Tell me, then,
and tell me truly, what land and country is this? Who are its inhabitants?
Am I on an island, or is this the sea board of some continent?"

Minerva answered, "Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have
come from somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this
is. It is a very celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and
West. It is rugged and not a good driving country, but it is by no
means a bid island for what there is of it. It grows any quantity
of corn and also wine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it
breeds cattle also and goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there
are watering places where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name
of Ithaca is known even as far as Troy, which I understand to be a
long way off from this Achaean country." 

Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his own
country, and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, and
made up a lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.

"I heard of Ithaca," said he, "when I was in Crete beyond the seas,
and now it seems I have reached it with all these treasures. I have
left as much more behind me for my children, but am flying because
I killed Orsilochus son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete.
I killed him because he wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from
Troy with so much trouble and danger both on the field of battle and
by the waves of the weary sea; he said I had not served his father
loyally at Troy as vassal, but had set myself up as an independent
ruler, so I lay in wait for him and with one of my followers by the
road side, and speared him as he was coming into town from the country.
my It was a very dark night and nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore,
that I had killed him, but as soon as I had done so I went to a ship
and besought the owners, who were Phoenicians, to take me on board
and set me in Pylos or in Elis where the Epeans rule, giving them
as much spoil as satisfied them. They meant no guile, but the wind
drove them off their course, and we sailed on till we came hither
by night. It was all we could do to get inside the harbour, and none
of us said a word about supper though we wanted it badly, but we all
went on shore and lay down just as we were. I was very tired and fell
asleep directly, so they took my goods out of the ship, and placed
them beside me where I was lying upon the sand. Then they sailed away
to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distress of mind."

Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand.
Then she took the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, "He must
be indeed a shifty lying fellow," said she, "who could surpass you
in all manner of craft even though you had a god for your antagonist.
Dare-devil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can
you not drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now
that you are in your own country again? We will say no more, however,
about this, for we can both of us deceive upon occasion- you are the
most accomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while I
for diplomacy and subtlety have no equal among the gods. Did you not
know Jove's daughter Minerva- me, who have been ever with you, who
kept watch over you in all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacians
take so great a liking to you? And now, again, I am come here to talk
things over with you, and help you to hide the treasure I made the
Phaeacians give you; I want to tell you about the troubles that await
you in your own house; you have got to face them, but tell no one,
neither man nor woman, that you have come home again. Bear everything,
and put up with every man's insolence, without a word." 

And Ulysses answered, "A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but
you are so constantly changing your appearance that when he meets
you it is a hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not.
This much, however, I know exceedingly well; you were very kind to
me as long as we Achaeans were fighting before Troy, but from the
day on which we went on board ship after having sacked the city of
Priam, and heaven dispersed us- from that day, Minerva, I saw no more
of you, and cannot ever remember your coming to my ship to help me
in a difficulty; I had to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered
me from evil and I reached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged
me and took me into the town. And now, I beseech you in your father's
name, tell me the truth, for I do not believe I am really back in
Ithaca. I am in some other country and you are mocking me and deceiving
me in all you have been saying. Tell me then truly, have I really
got back to my own country?" 

"You are always taking something of that sort into your head," replied
Minerva, "and that is why I cannot desert you in your afflictions;
you are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself on returning
from so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife
and children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them
or hearing any news about them till you have exploited your wife,
who remains at home vainly grieving for you, and having no peace night
or day for the tears she sheds on your behalf. As for my not coming
near you, I was never uneasy about you, for I was certain you would
get back safely though you would lose all your men, and I did not
wish to quarrel with my uncle Neptune, who never forgave you for having
blinded his son. I will now, however, point out to you the lie of
the land, and you will then perhaps believe me. This is the haven
of the old merman Phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at
the head of it; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;] here too
is the overarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable
hecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Neritum."

As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared.
Then Ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and
kissed the bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the
nymphs, saying, "Naiad nymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that
I was never again to see you, now therefore I greet you with all loving
salutations, and I will bring you offerings as in the old days, if
Jove's redoubtable daughter will grant me life, and bring my son to
manhood." 

"Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that," rejoined Minerva,
"let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave,
where they will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it
all." 

Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding
places, while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze,
and good clothing which the Phaecians had given him. They stowed everything
carefully away, and Minerva set a stone against the door of the cave.
Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and consulted
how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors. 

"Ulysses," said Minerva, "noble son of Laertes, think how you can
lay hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in
your house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding
presents to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving
hope and sending your encouraging messages to every one of them, but
meaning the very opposite of all she says' 

And Ulysses answered, "In good truth, goddess, it seems I should have
come to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if
you had not given me such timely information. Advise me how I shall
best avenge myself. Stand by my side and put your courage into my
heart as on the day when we loosed Troy's fair diadem from her brow.
Help me now as you did then, and I will fight three hundred men, if
you, goddess, will be with me." 

"Trust me for that," said she, "I will not lose sight of you when
once we set about it, and I would imagine that some of those who are
devouring your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their
blood and brains. I will begin by disguising you so that no human
being shall know you; I will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall
lose all your yellow hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall
fill all who see it with loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for
you, and make you an unseemly object in the sight of the suitors,
of your wife, and of the son whom you left behind you. Then go at
once to the swineherd who is in charge of your pigs; he has been always
well affected towards you, and is devoted to Penelope and your son;
you will find him feeding his pigs near the rock that is called Raven
by the fountain Arethusa, where they are fattening on beechmast and
spring water after their manner. Stay with him and find out how things
are going, while I proceed to Sparta and see your son, who is with
Menelaus at Lacedaemon, where he has gone to try and find out whether
you are still alive." 

"But why," said Ulysses, "did you not tell him, for you knew all about
it? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship
while others are eating up his estate?" 

Minerva answered, "Never mind about him, I sent him that he might
be well spoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty,
but is staying quite comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded
with abundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and
are lying in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can
get home. I do not much think they will succeed, but rather that some
of those who are now eating up your estate will first find a grave
themselves." 

As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with
wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over
his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine
ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about
him, and a tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also
gave him an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished
him with a staff and a wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for
him to sling it over his shoulder. 

When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess
went straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIV

Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the
wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached
the place where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd,
who was the most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front
of his hut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which
could be seen from far. He had made them spacious and fair to see,
with a free ran for the pigs all round them; he had built them during
his master's absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground,
without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced
them on top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong
fence of oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while
inside lie had built twelve sties near one another for the sows to
lie in. There were fifty pigs wallowing in each sty, all of them breeding
sows; but the boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for
the suitors kept on eating them, and die swineherd had to send them
the best he had continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar
pigs, and the herdsman's four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves,
slept always with them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out
a pair of sandals from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were
out herding the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the
fourth to town with a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors
that they might sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.

When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew
at him, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold
of the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn
by them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox
hide, rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the
dogs off by shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to
Ulysses, "Old man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of
you, and then you would have got me into trouble. The gods have given
me quite enough worries without that, for I have lost the best of
masters, and am in continual grief on his account. I have to attend
swine for other people to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the
light of day, is starving in some distant land. But come inside, and
when you have had your fill of bread and wine, tell me where you come
from, and all about your misfortunes." 

On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top
of this he threw the shaggy chamois skin- a great thick one- on which
he used to sleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus
welcome, and said "May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you
your heart's desire in return for the kind way in which you have received
me." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Stranger, though a still
poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult
him, for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what
you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have
young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for
heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good
to me and given me something of my own- a house, a piece of land,
a good looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant
who has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered
as they have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had
grown old here he would have done great things by me, but he is gone,
and I wish that Helen's whole race were utterly destroyed, for she
has been the death of many a good man. It was this matter that took
my master to Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans
in the cause of kin Agamemnon." 

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the sties where
the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought
back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
on them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it
before Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled
it over with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a
bowl of ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.

"Fall to, stranger," said he, "on a dish of servant's pork. The fat
pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or scruple;
but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and respect those
who do what is lawful and right. Even the fierce free-booters who
go raiding on other people's land, and Jove gives them their spoil-
even they, when they have filled their ships and got home again live
conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but some god
seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone; they
will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their offers
of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force, without
fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they sacrifice
not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine, for
he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca or on
the mainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put
together. I will tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of cattle
upon the mainland, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also twelve
droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him twelve
widely spreading herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs even large
flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in the
charge of excellent goatherds. Each one of these sends the suitors
the best goat in the flock every day. As for myself, I am in charge
of the pigs that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the
best I have and sending it to them." 

This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and
was satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank,
filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and
said as he took it in his hands, "My friend, who was this master of
yours that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as
you tell me? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell
me who he was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and
the other gods know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for
I have travelled much." 

Eumaeus answered, "Old man, no traveller who comes here with news
will get Ulysses' wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless,
tramps in want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of
lies, and not a word of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca
goes to my mistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them
in, makes much of them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying
all the time as women will when they have lost their husbands. And
you too, old man, for a shirt and a cloak would doubtless make up
a very pretty story. But the wolves and birds of prey have long since
torn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and
his bones are lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he
is dead and gone, and a bad business it is for all his friends- for
me especially; go where I may I shall never find so good a master,
not even if I were to go home to my mother and father where I was
bred and born. I do not so much care, however, about my parents now,
though I should dearly like to see them again in my own country; it
is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak of him
without reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very fond
of me, and took such care of me that whereever he may be I shall always
honour his memory." 

"My friend," replied Ulysses, "you are very positive, and very hard
of belief about your master's coming home again, nevertheless I will
not merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me
anything for my news till he has actually come, you may then give
me a shirt and cloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want,
but I will not take anything at all till then, for I hate a man, even
as I hate hell fire, who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I
swear by king Jove, by the rites of hospitality, and by that hearth
of Ulysses to which I have now come, that all will surely happen as
I have said it will. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with
the end of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here
to do vengeance on all those who are ill treating his wife and son."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Old man, you will neither
get paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home;
drink you wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do
not keep on reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any
one speaks about my honoured master. As for your oath we will let
it alone, but I only wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father
Laertes, and his son Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about this
same boy of his; he was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare
to be no worse man, face and figure, than his father, but some one,
either god or man, has been unsettling his mind, so he has gone off
to Pylos to try and get news of his father, and the suitors are lying
in wait for him as he is coming home, in the hope of leaving the house
of Arceisius without a name in Ithaca. But let us say no more about
him, and leave him to be taken, or else to escape if the son of Saturn
holds his hand over him to protect him. And now, old man, tell me
your own story; tell me also, for I want to know, who you are and
where you come from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner
of ship you came in, how crew brought you to Ithaca, and from what
country they professed to come- for you cannot have come by land."

And Ulysses answered, "I will tell you all about it. If there were
meat and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing
to do but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could
easily talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the
story of the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.

"I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well-to-do man, who had many
sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had
purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax
(whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour among
the Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons)
put me on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock.
When, however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided
his estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave a holding
and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marry into
a rich family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the
field of battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw
you can see what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to
spare. Mars and Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked
my men to surprise the enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death
so much as a thought, but was the first to leap forward and spear
all whom I could overtake. Such was I in battle, but I did not care
about farm work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring
up children. My delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows-
things that most men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing
and another another, and this was what I was most naturally inclined
to. Before the Achaeans went to Troy, nine times was I in command
of men and ships on foreign service, and I amassed much wealth. I
had my pick of the spoil in the first instance, and much more was
allotted to me later on. 

"My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans, but
when Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many perished,
the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to Troy,
and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doing so.
There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked the
city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then it
was that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one month happily
with my children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea
of making a descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned
it. I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six
days I and my men made feast, and I found them many victims both for
sacrifice to the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we
went on board and set sail from Crete with a fair North wind behind
us though we were going down a river. Nothing went ill with any of
our ships, and we had no sickness on board, but sat where we were
and let the ships go as the wind and steersmen took them. On the fifth
day we reached the river Aegyptus; there I stationed my ships in the
river, bidding my men stay by them and keep guard over them while
I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage.

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged
the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives
and children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and
when they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till
the plain was filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the
gleam of armour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would
no longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The
Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced
labour for them. Jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus- and
I wish I had died then and there in Egypt instead, for there was much
sorrow in store for me- I took off my helmet and shield and dropped
my spear from my hand; then I went straight up to the king's chariot,
clasped his knees and kissed them, whereon he spared my life, bade
me get into his chariot, and took me weeping to his own home. Many
made at me with their ashen spears and tried to kil me in their fury,
but the king protected me, for he feared the wrath of Jove the protector
of strangers, who punishes those who do evil. 

"I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among
the Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now
going on for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning
rascal, who had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this
man talked me over into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house
and his possessions lay. I stayed there for a whole twelve months,
but at the end of that time when months and days had gone by till
the same season had come round again, he set me on board a ship bound
for Libya, on a pretence that I was to take a cargo along with him
to that place, but really that he might sell me as a slave and take
the money I fetched. I suspected his intention, but went on board
with him, for I could not help it. 

"The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea
that lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled
their destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and
could see nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our
ship and the sea grew dark beneath it. Then Jove let fly with his
thunderbolts and the ship went round and round and was filled with
fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. The men fell all into
the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship looking
like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all
chance of getting home again. I was all dismayed; Jove, however, sent
the ship's mast within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung
to it, and drifted before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift
but in the darkness of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to
the Thesprotian coast. There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained
me hospitably without charging me anything at all for his son found
me when I was nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised
me by the hand, took me to his father's house and gave me clothes
to wear. 

"There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he
had entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on
his homeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and
wrought iron that Ulysses had got together. There was enough to keep
his family for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of
king Pheidon. But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he
might learn Jove's mind from the god's high oak tree, and know whether
after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in
secret. Moreover the king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings
in his own house as he did so, that the ship was by the water side,
and the crew found, that should take him to his own country. He sent
me off however before Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a
Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium,
and he told those in charge of her to be sure and take me safely to
King Acastus. 

"These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to
the very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out
from land they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me
of the shirt and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the
tattered old clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall,
they reached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with
a strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper
by the sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having
drawn my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where
I struck out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore
near a thick wood in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at
my having escaped and went searching about for me, till at last they
thought it was no further use and went back to their ship. The gods,
having hidden me thus easily, then took me to a good man's door- for
it seems that I am not to die yet awhile." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Poor unhappy stranger,
I have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting,
but that part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me
to believe it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in
this way? I know all about the return of my master. The gods one and
all of them detest him, or they would have taken him before Troy,
or let him die with friends around him when the days of his fighting
were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his
ashes and his son would have been heir to his renown, but now the
storm winds have spirited him away we know not whither. 

"As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go
to the town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some
news about Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both
those who grieve over the king's absence, and those who rejoice at
it because they can eat up his property without paying for it. For
my own part I have never cared about asking anyone else since the
time when I was taken in by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and
come a long way till at last he reached my station, and I was very
kind to him. He said he had seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the
Cretans, refitting his ships which had been damaged in a gale. He
said Ulysses would return in the following summer or autumn with his
men, and that he would bring back much wealth. And now you, you unfortunate
old man, since fate has brought you to my door, do not try to flatter
me in this way with vain hopes. It is not for any such reason that
I shall treat you kindly, but only out of respect for Jove the god
of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying you." 

Ulysses answered, "I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have
given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make
a bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your
master comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send
me to Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say
he will, set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder
precepice, as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling
lies." 

"And a pretty figure I should cut then," replied Eumaeus, both now
and hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut
and showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good
earnest if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will
come in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper."

Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with
the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their sties, and
a tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them.
But Eumaeus called to his men and said, "Bring in the best pig you
have, that I may sacrifice for this stranger, and we will take toll
of him ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding
pigs, while others reap the fruit of our labour." 

On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a
fine fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus
did not forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the
first thing he did was to cut bristles from the pig's face and throw
them into the fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses
might return home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of
oak which he had kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and
stunned it, while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then they
cut it up, and Eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint
on to some of the fat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid
upon the embers; they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces
upon the spits and roasted them till they were done; when they had
taken them off the spits they threw them on to the dresser in a heap.
The swineherd, who was a most equitable man, then stood up to give
every one his share. He made seven portions; one of these he set apart
for Mercury the son of Maia and the nymphs, praying to them as he
did so; the others he dealt out to the men man by man. He gave Ulysses
some slices cut lengthways down the loin as a mark of especial honour,
and Ulysses was much pleased. "I hope, Eumaeus," said he, "that Jove
will be as well disposed towards you as I am, for the respect you
are showing to an outcast like myself." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Eat, my good fellow, and
enjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that,
just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses."

As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt sacrifice
to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, put the
cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion. Mesaulius
brought them their bread; the swineherd had bought this man on his
own account from among the Taphians during his master's absence, and
had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the good
things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat
and drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they
all went to bed after having made a hearty supper. 

Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon.
It poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West,
which is a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus,
in the excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak
and give it him, or make one of his men give him one. "Listen to me,"
said he, "Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I
will tell you something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this
way; wine will make even a wise man fall to singing; it will make
him chuckle and dance and say many a word that he had better leave
unspoken; still, as I have begun, I will go on. Would that I were
still young and strong as when we got up an ambuscade before Troy.
Menelaus and Ulysses were the leaders, but I was in command also,
for the other two would have it so. When we had come up to the wall
of the city we crouched down beneath our armour and lay there under
cover of the reeds and thick brush-wood that grew about the swamp.
It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the snow fell small
and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated thick with rime.
The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept comfortably enough
with their shields about their shoulders, but I had carelessly left
my cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too cold, and had
gone off in nothing but my shirt and shield. When the night was two-thirds
through and the stars had shifted their their places, I nudged Ulysses
who was close to me with my elbow, and he at once gave me his ear.

"'Ulysses,' said I, 'this cold will be the death of me, for I have
no cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but
my shirt, and I do not know what to do.' 

"Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following
plan: 

"'Keep still,' said he in a low voice, 'or the others will hear you.'
Then he raised his head on his elbow. 

"'My friends,' said he, 'I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep.
We are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and
tell Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.' 

"On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
till morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in
those days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak
both out of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier;
but now people look down upon me because my clothes are shabby."

And Eumaeus answered, "Old man, you have told us an excellent story,
and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning
you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for we
have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has only
one. When Ulysses' son comes home again he will give you both cloak
and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go." 

With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some goatskins
and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here Ulysses lay
down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak that he
kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.

Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the
swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready
to go and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his property
during his master's absence. First he slung his sword over his brawny
shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also took
the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of attack
from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where the pigs
were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
the North wind. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XV

But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses'
son that he was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping
in the forecourt of Menelaus's house; Pisistratus was fast asleep,
but Telemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy
father, so Minerva went close up to him and said: 

"Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer,
nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house;
they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have
been on a fool's errand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if
you wish to find your excellent mother still there when you get back.
Her father and brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus,
who has given her more than any of the others, and has been greatly
increasing his wedding presents. I hope nothing valuable may have
been taken from the house in spite of you, but you know what women
are- they always want to do the best they can for the man who marries
them, and never give another thought to the children of their first
husband, nor to their father either when he is dead and done with.
Go home, therefore, and put everything in charge of the most respectable
woman servant that you have, until it shall please heaven to send
you a wife of your own. Let me tell you also of another matter which
you had better attend to. The chief men among the suitors are lying
in wait for you in the Strait between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean
to kill you before you can reach home. I do not much think they will
succeed; it is more likely that some of those who are now eating up
your property will find a grave themselves. Sail night and day, and
keep your ship well away from the islands; the god who watches over
you and protects you will send you a fair wind. As soon as you get
to Ithaca send your ship and men on to the town, but yourself go straight
to the swineherd who has charge your pigs; he is well disposed towards
you, stay with him, therefore, for the night, and then send him to
Penelope to tell her that you have got back safe from Pylos."

Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus
with his heel to rouse him, and said, "Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke
the horses to the chariot, for we must set off home." 

But Pisistratus said, "No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive
in the dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought
his presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good-bye
to us in the usual way. So long as he lives a guest should never forget
a host who has shown him kindness." 

As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen,
leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he
put on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his
shoulders, and went out to meet him. "Menelaus," said he, "let me
go back now to my own country, for I want to get home." 

And Menelaus answered, "Telemachus, if you insist on going I will
not detain you. not like to see a host either too fond of his guest
or too rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting
a man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if
he would like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he
is in the house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then,
till I can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till
you have yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient
dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once
more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting
out on such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making
a tour in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and
will conduct you myself through all our principal cities. No one will
send us away empty handed; every one will give us something- a bronze
tripod, a couple of mules, or a gold cup." 

"Menelaus," replied Telemachus, "I want to go home at once, for when
I came away I left my property without protection, and fear that while
looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that something
valuable has been stolen during my absence." 

When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants
to prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house.
At this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had
just got up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some
meat, which he at once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant
store room, not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When
he reached the place where the treasures of his house were kept, he
selected a double cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also
a silver mixing-bowl. Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she
kept the lovely dresses which she had made with her own hands, and
took out one that was largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery;
it glittered like a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest.
Then they all came back through the house again till they got to Telemachus,
and Menelaus said, "Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno,
bring you safely home according to your desire. I will now present
you with the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house.
It is a mixing-bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid
with gold, and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians
made me a present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while
I was on my return home. I should like to give it to you."

With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus,
while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing-bowl and set it before
him. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.

"I too, my son," said she, "have something for you as a keepsake from
the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go
back rejoicing to your own country and to your home." 

So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly.
Then Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them
all as he did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus
into the house, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant
brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into
a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean
table beside them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered
them many good things of what there was in the house. Eteoneus carved
the meat and gave them each their portions, while Megapenthes poured
out the wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that
were before them, but as soon as they had had had enough to eat and
drink Telemachus and Pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their
places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and
under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court, and Menelaus came
after them with a golden goblet of wine in his right hand that they
might make a drink-offering before they set out. He stood in front
of the horses and pledged them, saying, "Farewell to both of you;
see that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind
to me as any father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before
Troy." 

"We will be sure, sir," answered Telemachus, "to tell him everything
as soon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses
returned when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very
great kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents
I am taking with me." 

As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand- an eagle with
a great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the
farm yard- and all the men and women were running after it and shouting.
It came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands
in front of the horses. When they saw it they were glad, and their
hearts took comfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, "Tell me,
Menelaus, has heaven sent this omen for us or for you?" 

Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him
to make, but Helen was too quick for him and said, "I will read this
matter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it
will come to pass. The eagle came from the mountain where it was bred
and has its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelled
far and suffered much, will return to take his revenge- if indeed
he is not back already and hatching mischief for the suitors."

"May Jove so grant it," replied Telemachus; "if it should prove to
be so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when
I am at home." 

As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed
through the town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon
their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and
darkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles
lived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. There they passed
the night and were treated hospitably. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their
places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and
under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus lashed
his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came
to Pylos, and then Telemachus said: 

"Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask
you. You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we
are both of an age, and this journey has brought us together still
more closely; do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me
there, for if I go to your father's house he will try to keep me in
the warmth of his good will towards me, and I must go home at once."

Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end
he deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus's
beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel.
Then he said, "Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also
before I can reach home to tell my father. I know how obstinate he
is, and am sure he will not let you go; he will come down here to
fetch you, and he will not go back without you. But he will be very
angry." 

With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians
and soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together
and gave his orders. "Now, my men," said he, "get everything in order
on board the ship, and let us set out home." 

Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But
as Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva
in the ship's stern, there came to him a man from a distant country,
a seer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He
was descended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of
sheep; he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into
exile by the great and powerful king Neleus. Neleus seized his goods
and held them for a whole year, during which he was a close prisoner
in the house of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on
account of the daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a
great sorrow that dread Erinyes had laid upon him. In the end, however,
he escaped with his life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos,
avenged the wrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of
Neleus to his brother. Then he left the country and went to Argos,
where it was ordained that he should reign over much people. There
he married, established himself, and had two famous sons Antiphates
and Mantius. Antiphates became father of Oicleus, and Oicleus of Amphiaraus,
who was dearly loved both by Jove and by Apollo, but he did not live
to old age, for he was killed in Thebes by reason of a woman's gifts.
His sons were Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. Mantius, the other son of
Melampus, was father to Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned in
gold, carried off Cleitus for his beauty's sake, that he might dwell
among the immortals, but Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer
in the whole world now that Amphiaraus was dead. He quarrelled with
his father and went to live in Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied
for all men. 

His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he
was making drink-offerings and praying in his ship. "Friend'" said
he, "now that I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you
by your sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them,
I pray you also by your own head and by those of your followers, tell
me the truth and nothing but the truth. Who and whence are you? Tell
me also of your town and parents." 

Telemachus said, "I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca,
and my father is 'Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he
has come to some miserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and
got my crew together to see if I can hear any news of him, for he
has been away a long time." 

"I too," answered Theoclymenus, am an exile, for I have killed a man
of my own race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and they
have great power among the Argives. I am flying to escape death at
their hands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the
earth. I am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship
that they may not kill me, for I know they are in pursuit."

"I will not refuse you," replied Telemachus, "if you wish to join
us. Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably according
to what we have." 

On this he received Theoclymenus' spear and laid it down on the deck
of the ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus
sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told them
to catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They
set the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made
it fast with the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with
sheets of twisted ox hide. Minerva sent them a fair wind that blew
fresh and strong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible.
Thus then they passed by Crouni and Chalcis. 

Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vessel
made a quick pass sage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans
rule. Telemachus then headed her for the flying islands, wondering
within himself whether he should escape death or should be taken prisoner.

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the
hut, and the men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat
and drink, Ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether
he would continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the
station or pack him off to the city; so he said: 

"Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin begging
about the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men.
Give me your advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go
with me and show me the way. I will go the round of the city begging
as I needs must, to see if any one will give me a drink and a piece
of bread. I should like also to go to the house of Ulysses and bring
news of her husband to queen Penelope. I could then go about among
the suitors and see if out of all their abundance they will give me
a dinner. I should soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts
of ways. Listen and believe when I tell you that by the blessing of
Mercury who gives grace and good name to the works of all men, there
is no one living who would make a more handy servant than I should-
to put fresh wood on the fire, chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine,
and do all those services that poor men have to do for their betters."

The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. "Heaven
help me," he exclaimed, "what ever can have put such a notion as that
into your head? If you go near the suitors you will be undone to a
certainty, for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. They
would never think of taking a man like you for a servant. Their servants
are all young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and shirts, with
well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables are kept
quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. Stay where
you are, then; you are not in anybody's way; I do not mind your being
here, no more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comes home
he will give you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you
want to go." 

Ulysses answered, "I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are
to me, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble;
there is nothing worse than being always ways on the tramp; still,
when men have once got low down in the world they will go through
a great deal on behalf of their miserable bellies. Since however you
press me to stay here and await the return of Telemachus, tell about
Ulysses' mother, and his father whom he left on the threshold of old
age when he set out for Troy. Are they still living or are they already
dead and in the house of Hades?" 

"I will tell you all about them," replied Eumaeus, "Laertes is still
living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully his own house,
for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also
about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him
more than anything else did. She came to an unhappy end through sorrow
for her son: may no friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by me
come to such an end as she did. As long as she was still living, though
she was always grieving, I used to like seeing her and asking her
how she did, for she brought me up along with her daughter Ctimene,
the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she
made little difference between us. When, however, we both grew up,
they sent Ctimene to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As
for me, my mistress gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of
sandals for my feet, and sent me off into the country, but she was
just as fond of me as ever. This is all over now. Still it has pleased
heaven to prosper my work in the situation which I now hold. I have
enough to eat and drink, and can find something for any respectable
stranger who comes here; but there is no getting a kind word or deed
out of my mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked
people. Servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have a talk
with her; they like to have something to eat and drink at the house,
and something too to take back with them into the country. This is
what will keep servants in a good humour." 

Ulysses answered, "Then you must have been a very little fellow, Eumaeus,
when you were taken so far away from your home and parents. Tell me,
and tell me true, was the city in which your father and mother lived
sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you were
alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for
whatever your master gave them?" 

"Stranger," replied Eumaeus, "as regards your question: sit still,
make yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The
nights are now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for
sleeping and sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed
till bed time, too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one
of the others wishes to go to bed let him leave us and do so; he can
then take my master's pigs out when he has done breakfast in the morning.
We two will sit here eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one
another stories about our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered
much, and been buffeted about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling
the memory of sorrows that have long gone by. As regards your question,
then, my tale is as follows: 

"You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over above
Ortygia, where the land begins to turn round and look in another direction.
It is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good, with much pasture
fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine and wheat. Dearth
never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any sickness, but
when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills them with his
painless shafts. It contains two communities, and the whole country
is divided between these two. My father Ctesius son of Ormenus, a
man comparable to the gods, reigned over both. 

"Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia
(for the Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had
freighted with gewgaws of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician
woman in my father's house, very tall and comely, and an excellent
servant; these scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing
near their ship, seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman
can resist, no matter how good she may be by nature. The man who had
seduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on
this she told him her father's name. 'I come from Sidon,' said she,
'and am daughter to Arybas, a man rolling in wealth. One day as I
was coming into the town from the country some Taphian pirates seized
me and took me here over the sea, where they sold me to the man who
owns this house, and he gave them their price for me.' 

"The man who had seduced her then said, 'Would you like to come along
with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?
They are both alive and are said to be well off.' 

"'I will do so gladly,' answered she, 'if you men will first swear
me a solemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.'

"They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their
oath the woman said, 'Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the
street or at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one
should go and tell my master, in which case he would suspect something.
He would put me in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep
your own counsel therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can,
and send me word when you have done loading. I will bring as much
gold as I can lay my hands on, and there is something else also that
I can do towards paying my fare. I am nurse to the son of the good
man of the house, a funny little fellow just able to run about. I
will carry him off in your ship, and you will get a great deal of
money for him if you take him and sell him in foreign parts.'

"On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a whole
year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise,
and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the
woman. Their messenger, a very cunning fellow, came to my father's
house bringing a necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it;
and while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring
it and bargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the woman and
then went back to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led
me out of the house. In the fore part of the house she saw the tables
set with the cups of guests who had been feasting with my father,
as being in attendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting
of the public assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried
them off in the bosom of her dress, while I followed her, for I knew
no better. The sun was now set, and darkness was over all the land,
so we hurried on as fast as we could till we reached the harbour,
where the Phoenician ship was lying. When they had got on board they
sailed their ways over the sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent
then a fair wind; six days did we sail both night and day, but on
the seventh day Diana struck the woman and she fell heavily down into
the ship's hold as though she were a sea gull alighting on the water;
so they threw her overboard to the seals and fishes, and I was left
all sorrowful and alone. Presently the winds and waves took the ship
to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of his chattels for me, and thus
it was that ever I came to set eyes upon this country." 

Ulysses answered, "Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortunes
with the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good
as well as evil, for in spite of everything you have a good master,
who sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead
a good life, whereas I am still going about begging my way from city
to city." 

Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left
for sleep, for it was soon daybreak. In the meantime Telemachus and
his crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the
mast, and rowed the ship into the harbour. They cast out their mooring
stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the sea shore,
mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they had had enough
to eat and drink Telemachus said, "Take the ship on to the town, but
leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of my
farms. In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down
to the city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will
give you all a good dinner with meat and wine." 

Then Theoclymenus said, 'And what, my dear young friend, is to become
of me? To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? or
shall I go straight to your own house and to your mother?"

"At any other time," replied Telemachus, "I should have bidden you
go to my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at
the present moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for
I shall be away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often
show herself even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in
an upper chamber, out of their way; but I can tell you a man whose
house you can go to- I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is
held in the highest estimation by every one in Ithaca. He is much
the best man and the most persistent wooer, of all those who are paying
court to my mother and trying to take Ulysses' place. Jove, however,
in heaven alone knows whether or no they will come to a bad end before
the marriage takes place." 

As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand- a hawk, Apollo's
messenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore
them off, fell to the ground midway between Telemachus and the ship.
On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.
"Telemachus," said he, "that bird did not fly on your right hand without
having been sent there by some god. As soon as I saw it I knew it
was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there
will be no house in Ithaca more royal than your own." 

"I wish it may prove so," answered Telemachus. "If it does, I will
show you so much good will and give you so many presents that all
who meet you will congratulate you." 

Then he said to his friend Piraeus, "Piraeus, son of Clytius, you
have throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all
those who have accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this
stranger to your own house and entertain him hospitably till I can
come for him." 

And Piraeus answered, "Telemachus, you may stay away as long as you
please, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack
of hospitality." 

As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose
the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachus
bound on his sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head
of sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. Then they loosed the
hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city
as they had been told to do, while Telemachus strode on as fast as
he could, till he reached the homestead where his countless herds
of swine were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who
was so devoted a servant to his master. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XVI

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and
were were getting breakfast ready at daybreak for they had sent the
men out with the pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark,
but fawned upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing
that the dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus: 

"Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one
of your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning urn
him and not barking." 

The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the
door. Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing
wine fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed
his head and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could
not be more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his
old age, after ten years' absence in a foreign country and after having
gone through much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over as
though he had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:

"So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When
I heard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see
you any more. Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have
a good look at you now you are home again; it is not very often you
come into the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to
the town generally. I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on
what the suitors are doing." 

"So be it, old friend," answered Telemachus, "but I am come now because
I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her
old home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed
of Ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs."

"She is still at the house," replied Eumaeus, "grieving and breaking
her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually."

As spoke he took Telemachus' spear, whereon he crossed the stone threshold
and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place as he
entered, but Telemachus checked him; "Sit down, stranger." said he,
"I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay
it for me." 

Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green
brushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for Telemachus
to sit upon. Then the swineherd brought them platters of cold meat,
the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he filled
the bread baskets with bread as fast as he could. He mixed wine also
in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Ulysses. Then they
laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as
soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus,
"Old friend, where does this stranger come from? How did his crew
bring him to Ithaca, and who were they?-for assuredly he did not come
here by land"' 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "My son, I will tell you
the real truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great
traveller. At this moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship,
and has refuge at my station, so I will put him into your hands. Do
whatever you like with him, only remember that he is your suppliant."

"I am very much distressed," said Telemachus, "by what you have just
told me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yet young,
and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. My
mother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look
after the house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of
her husband, or whether the time is now come for her to take the best
man of those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the
most advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station
I will find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals,
and will send him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can
keep him here at the station, and I will send him clothes and food
that he may be no burden on you and on your men; but I will not have
him go near the suitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure
to ill-treat him in a way that would greatly grieve me; no matter
how valiant a man may be he can do nothing against numbers, for they
will be too strong for him." 

Then Ulysses said, "Sir, it is right that I should say something myself.
I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent way
in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you
are. Tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some
god set your people against you? May you not complain of your brothers-
for it is to these that a man may look for support, however great
his quarrel may be? I wish I were as young as you are and in my present
mind; if I were son to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses himself, I would
rather some one came and cut my head off, but I would go to the house
and be the bane of every one of these men. If they were too many for
me- I being single-handed- I would rather die fighting in my own house
than see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly
maltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in
an unseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no
purpose for an end that shall never be accomplished." 

And Telemachus answered, "I will tell you truly everything. There
is no emnity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers,
to whom a man may look for support however great his quarrel may be.
Jove has made us a race of only sons. Laertes was the only son of
Arceisius, and Ulysses only son of Laertes. I am myself the only son
of Ulysses who left me behind him when he went away, so that I have
never been of any use to him. Hence it comes that my house is in the
hands of numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring
islands, Dulichium, Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men
of Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying
court to my mother, who will neither say point blank that she will
not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc
of my estate, and before long will do so with myself into the bargain.
The issue, however, rests with heaven. But do you, old friend Eumaeus,
go at once and tell Penelope that I am safe and have returned from
Pylos. Tell it to herself alone, and then come back here without letting
any one else know, for there are many who are plotting mischief against
me." 

"I understand and heed you," replied Eumaeus; "you need instruct me
no further, only I am going that way say whether I had not better
let poor Laertes know that you are returned. He used to superintend
the work on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses,
and he would eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they
tell me that from the day on which you set out for Pylos he has neither
eaten nor drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm,
but sits weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones."

"More's the pity," answered Telemachus, "I am sorry for him, but we
must leave him to himself just now. If people could have everything
their own way, the first thing I should choose would be the return
of my father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back
again, and do not turn out of your way to tell Laertes. Tell my mother
to send one of her women secretly with the news at once, and let him
hear it from her." 

Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals,
bound them to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched
him well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a
woman- fair, stately, and wise. She stood against the side of the
entry, and revealed herself to Ulysses, but Telemachus could not see
her, and knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves
be seen by everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they
did not bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of
the yards. She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows;
whereon he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall
of the yards. Then she said to him: 

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your
son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for
the destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. I will
not be long in joining you, for I too am eager for the fray."

As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw
a fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him
younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour,
filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. Then she
went away and Ulysses came back inside the hut. His son was astounded
when he saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be looking
upon a god. 

"Stranger," said he, "how suddenly you have changed from what you
were a moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour
is not the same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in
heaven? If so, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice
and offerings of wrought gold. Have mercy upon me." 

And Ulysses said, "I am no god, why should you take me for one? I
am your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at
the hands of lawless men." 

As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to
the ground, for he had restrained all tears till now. but Telemachus
could not yet believe that it was his father, and said: 

"You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopes
that I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself
contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young
at a moment's notice, unless a god were with him. A second ago you
were old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down
from heaven." 

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably
astonished at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who
will come hereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering
and much hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country.
What you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva,
who does with me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases.
At one moment she makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young
man with good clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods
who live in heaven to make any man look either rich or poor."

As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father
and wept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like
eagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their
half fledged young by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and
the sun would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemachus had
not suddenly said, "In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring
you to Ithaca? Of what nation did they declare themselves to be- for
you cannot have come by land?" 

"I will tell you the truth, my son," replied Ulysses. "It was the
Phaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in
the habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They
took me over the sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca,
after giving me many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. These
things by heaven's mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am now
come here on the suggestion of Minerva that we may consult about killing
our enemies. First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with
their number, that I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can
then turn the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight
the whole body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to
help us." 

To this Telemachus answered, "Father, I have always heard of your
renown both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of
is a very great one: I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men
cannot stand against many and brave ones. There are not ten suitors
only, nor twice ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their
number at once. There are fifty-two chosen youths from Dulichium,
and they have six servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty
young Achaeans from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all
of them well born. They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and
two men who can carve at table. If we face such numbers as this, you
may have bitter cause to rue your coming, and your revenge. See whether
you cannot think of some one who would be willing to come and help
us." 

"Listen to me," replied Ulysses, "and think whether Minerva and her
father Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find some
one else as well." 

"Those whom you have named," answered Telemachus, "are a couple of
good allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have
power over both gods and men." 

"These two," continued Ulysses, "will not keep long out of the fray,
when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore, return
home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before.
Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a miserable
old beggar. If you see them ill-treating me, steel your heart against
my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of the house,
or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently trying
to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to you,
for the day of their reckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, and
lay my saying to your heart, when Minerva shall put it in my mind,
I will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect
all the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store
room. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing
it; say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke,
inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but
has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly
that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine,
and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both
banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people
to use them. But leave a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and
me, and a couple oxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any
moment; Jove and Minerva will then soon quiet these people. There
is also another matter; if you are indeed my son and my blood runs
in your veins, let no one know that Ulysses is within the house- neither
Laertes, nor yet the swineherd, nor any of the servants, nor even
Penelope herself. Let you and me exploit the women alone, and let
us also make trial of some other of the men servants, to see who is
on our side and whose hand is against us." 

"Father," replied Telemachus, "you will come to know me by and by,
and when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do not
think, however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either
of us. Think it over. It will take us a long time to go the round
of the farms and exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will
be wasting your estate with impunity and without compunction. Prove
the women by all means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless,
but I am not in favour of going round and trying the men. We can attend
to that later on, if you really have some sign from Jove that he will
support you." 

Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought Telemachus
and his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. When they
had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land; their
servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all the
presents at the house of Clytius. Then they sent a servant to tell
Penelope that Telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the
ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.
This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the
same errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House,
the servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the
waiting women, "Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos"; but
Eumaeus went close up to Penelope, and said privately that her son
had given bidden him tell her. When he had given his message he left
the house with its outbuildings and went back to his pigs again.

The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they
went outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held
a council near the main entrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was
the first to speak. 

"My friends," said he, "this voyage of Telemachus's is a very serious
matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now, however,
let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to send
after the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can."

He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and
saw the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails,
and putting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others,
"We need not send them any message, for they are here. Some god must
have told them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake
her. 

On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew the
ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they
went up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not let
any one old or young sit along with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes,
spoke first. 

"Good heavens," said he, "see how the gods have saved this man from
destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all
day long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep,
but waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing
and killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us.
Let us consider how we can make an end of him. He must not escape
us; our affair is never likely to come off while is alive, for he
is very shrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on our side.
We must make haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he
will lose no time in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and
will tell all the world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to
take him. The people will not like this when they come to know of
it; we must see that they do us no hurt, nor drive us from our own
country into exile. Let us try and lay hold of him either on his farm
away from the town, or on the road hither. Then we can divide up his
property amongst us, and let his mother and the man who marries her
have the house. If this does not please you, and you wish Telemachus
to live on and hold his father's property, then we must not gather
here and eat up his goods in this way, but must make our offers to
Penelope each from his own house, and she can marry the man who will
give the most for her, and whose lot it is to win her." 

They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was the
son of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among
all the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of
Dulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope
than that of any of the other for he was a man of good natural disposition.
"My friends," said he, speaking to them plainly and in all honestly,
"I am not in favour of killing Telemachus. It is a heinous thing to
kill one who is of noble blood. Let us first take counsel of the gods,
and if the oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help to kill him
myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if they dissuade
us, I would have you hold your hands." 

Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose forthwith
and went to the house of Ulysses where they took their accustomed
seats. 

Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors.
She knew of the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had
overheard their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore
to the court attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors
she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister
holding a veil before her face, and rebuked Antinous saying:

"Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best
speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you
are nothing of the kind. Madman, why should you try to compass the
death of Telemachus, and take no heed of suppliants, whose witness
is Jove himself? It is not right for you to plot thus against one
another. Do you not remember how your father fled to this house in
fear of the people, who were enraged against him for having gone with
some Taphian pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace
with us? They wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he
had, but Ulysses stayed their hands although they were infuriated,
and now you devour his property without paying for it, and break my
heart by his wooing his wife and trying to kill his son. Leave off
doing so, and stop the others also." 

To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, "Take heart, Queen Penelope
daughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.
The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon
your son Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the
earth. I say- and it shall surely be- that my spear shall be reddened
with his blood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees,
held wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.
Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I have, and has nothing
to fear from the hands of us suitors. Of course, if death comes to
him from the gods, he cannot escape it." He said this to quiet her,
but in reality he was plotting against Telemachus. 

Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva
shed sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses
and his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and
were ready; helping one another to get supper ready; Minerva therefore
came up to Ulysses, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her
wand, and clad him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd
might recognize him and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope.

Telemachus was the first to speak. "So you have got back, Eumaeus,"
said he. "What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned,
or are they still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?"

"I did not think of asking about that," replied Eumaeus, "when I was
in the town. I thought I would give my message and come back as soon
as I could. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos,
and he was the first to tell the new your mother, but I can say what
I saw with my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill
of Mercury above the town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with
a number of men in her. They had many shields and spears, and I thought
it was the suitors, but I cannot be sure." 

On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus
could not see him. 

Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they
ate it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to
rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XVII

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus
bound on his sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands,
for he wanted to go into the city. "Old friend," said he to the swineherd,
"I will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will
never leave off grieving till she has seen me. As for this unfortunate
stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who
will give him a drink and a piece of bread. I have trouble enough
of my own, and cannot be burdened with other people. If this makes
him angry so much the worse for him, but I like to say what I mean."

Then Ulysses said, "Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar can
always do better in town than country, for any one who likes can give
him something. I am too old to care about remaining here at the beck
and call of a master. Therefore let this man do as you have just told
him, and take me to the town as soon as I have had a warm by the fire,
and the day has got a little heat in it. My clothes are wretchedly
thin, and this frosty morning I shall be perished with cold, for you
say the city is some way off." 

On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge
upon the When he reached home he stood his spear against a bearing-post
of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister itself, and
went inside. 

Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did. She was putting
the fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up
to him; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and
shoulders with their kisses. Penelope came out of her room looking
like Diana or Venus, and wept as she flung her arms about her son.
She kissed his forehead and both his beautiful eyes, "Light of my
eyes," she cried as she spoke fondly to him, "so you are come home
again; I made sure I was never going to see you any more. To think
of your having gone off to Pylos without saying anything about it
or obtaining my consent. But come, tell me what you saw."

"Do not scold me, mother,' answered Telemachus, "nor vex me, seeing
what a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress,
go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs
to all the gods if Jove will only grant us our revenge upon the suitors.
I must now go to the place of assembly to invite a stranger who has
come back with me from Pylos. I sent him on with my crew, and told
Piraeus to take him home and look after him till I could come for
him myself." 

She heeded her son's words, washed her face, changed her dress, and
vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would
only vouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors. 

Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand-
not alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. Minerva endowed him
with a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him
as he went by, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words
in their mouths and malice in their hearts; but he avoided them, and
went to sit with Mentor, Antiphus, and Halitherses, old friends of
his father's house, and they made him tell them all that had happened
to him. Then Piraeus came up with Theoclymenus, whom he had escorted
through the town to the place of assembly, whereon Telemachus at once
joined them. Piraeus was first to speak: "Telemachus," said he, "I
wish you would send some of your women to my house to take awa the
presents Menelaus gave you." 

"We do not know, Piraeus," answered Telemachus, "what may happen.
If the suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property among
them, I would rather you had the presents than that any of those people
should get hold of them. If on the other hand I manage to kill them,
I shall be much obliged if you will kindly bring me my presents."

With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house. When they
got there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into
the baths, and washed themselves. When the maids had washed and anointed
them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats
at table. A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden
ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands;
and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them
bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.
Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by one of the bearing-posts
of the cloister, and spinning. Then they laid their hands on the good
things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough to
eat and drink Penelope said: 

"Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which
I have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set
out for Troy with the sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make
it clear to me before the suitors came back to the house, whether
or no you had been able to hear anything about the return of your
father." 

"I will tell you then truth," replied her son. "We went to Pylos and
saw Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably
as though I were a son of his own who had just returned after a long
absence; so also did his sons; but he said he had not heard a word
from any human being about Ulysses, whether he was alive or dead.
He sent me, therefore, with a chariot and horses to Menelaus. There
I saw Helen, for whose sake so many, both Argives and Trojans, were
in heaven's wisdom doomed to suffer. Menelaus asked me what it was
that had brought me to Lacedaemon, and I told him the whole truth,
whereon he said, 'So, then, these cowards would usurp a brave man's
bed? A hind might as well lay her new-born young in the lair of a
lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell.
The lion, when he comes back to his lair, will make short work with
the pair of them, and so will Ulysses with these suitors. By father
Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was
when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily
that all the Greeks cheered him- if he is still such, and were to
come near these suitors, they would have a short shrift and a sorry
wedding. As regards your question, however, I will not prevaricate
nor deceive you, but what the old man of the sea told me, so much
will I tell you in full. He said he could see Ulysses on an island
sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who was keeping
him prisoner, and he could not reach his home, for he had no ships
nor sailors to take him over the sea.' This was what Menelaus told
me, and when I had heard his story I came away; the gods then gave
me a fair wind and soon brought me safe home again." 

With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus
said to her: 

"Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things;
listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide
nothing from you. May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the
rites of hospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come,
that Ulysses himself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about
the country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil
deeds and preparing a day of reckoning for the suitors. I saw an omen
when I was on the ship which meant this, and I told Telemachus about
it." 

"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if your words come true,
you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who
see you shall congratulate you." 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs,
or aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of
the house, and behaving with all their old insolence. But when it
was now time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come
into the town from all the country round, with their shepherds as
usual, then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited
upon them at table, said, "Now then, my young masters, you have had
enough sport, so come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner
is not a bad thing, at dinner time." 

They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within
the house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside,
and then sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of
them fat and well grown. Thus they made ready for their meal. In the
meantime Ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town,
and the swineherd said, "Stranger, I suppose you still want to go
to town to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part
I should have liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must
do as my master tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding
from one's master is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for
it is now broad day; it will be night again directly and then you
will find it colder." 

"I know, and understand you," replied Ulysses; "you need say no more.
Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it
to walk with, for you say the road is a very rough one."

As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders,
by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his
liking. The two then started, leaving the station in charge of the
dogs and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and
his master followed after, looking like some broken-down old tramp
as he leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. When
they had got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city,
they reached the fountain from which the citizens drew their water.
This had been made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was a
grove of water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and
the clear cold water came down to it from a rock high up, while above
the fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers
used to sacrifice. Here Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as
he was driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors'
dinner, and there were two shepherds with him. When he saw Eumaeus
and Ulysses he reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language,
which made Ulysses very angry. 

"There you go," cried he, "and a precious pair you are. See how heaven
brings birds of the same feather to one another. Where, pray, master
swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? It would make
any one sick to see such a creature at table. A fellow like this never
won a prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his
shoulders against every man's door post, and begging, not for swords
and cauldrons like a man, but only for a few scraps not worth begging
for. If you would give him to me for a hand on my station, he might
do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit of sweet feed to the kids,
and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased on whey; but
he has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; he
will do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his insatiable
belly. I say, therefore and it shall surely be- if he goes near Ulysses'
house he will get his head broken by the stools they will fling at
him, till they turn him out." 

On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of pure
wantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path.
For a moment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill
him with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains
out; he resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check,
but the swineherd looked straight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting
up his hands and praying to heaven as he did so. 

"Fountain nymphs," he cried, "children of Jove, if ever Ulysses burned
you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my
prayer that heaven may send him home. He would soon put an end to
the swaggering threats with which such men as you go about insulting
people-gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruin
through bad shepherding." 

Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, "You ill-conditioned cur, what
are you talking about? Some day or other I will put you on board ship
and take you to a foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket
the money you will fetch. I wish I were as sure that Apollo would
strike Telemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill
him, as I am that Ulysses will never come home again." 

With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he went
quickly forward and soon reached the house of his master. When he
got there he went in and took his seat among the suitors opposite
Eurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others. The servants
brought him a portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread
before him that he might eat. Presently Ulysses and the swineherd
came up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music, for Phemius
was just beginning to sing to the suitors. Then Ulysses took hold
of the swineherd's hand, and said: 

"Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place. No matter how
far you go you will find few like it. One building keeps following
on after another. The outer court has a wall with battlements all
round it; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it
would be a hard matter to take it by force of arms. I perceive, too,
that there are many people banqueting within it, for there is a smell
of roast meat, and I hear a sound of music, which the gods have made
to go along with feasting." 

Then Eumaeus said, "You have perceived aright, as indeed you generally
do; but let us think what will be our best course. Will you go inside
first and join the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will you
wait here and let me go in first? But do not wait long, or some one
may you loitering about outside, and throw something at you. Consider
this matter I pray you." 

And Ulysses answered, "I understand and heed. Go in first and leave
me here where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and having things
thrown at me. I have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea
that I am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. But a
man cannot hide away the cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy
which gives much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships
are fitted out to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people."

As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised
his head and pricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom Ulysses had
bred before setting out for Troy, but he had never had any work out
of him. In the old days he used to be taken out by the young men when
they went hunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his
master was gone he was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow
dung that lay in front of the stable doors till the men should come
and draw it away to manure the great close; and he was full of fleas.
As soon as he saw Ulysses standing there, he dropped his ears and
wagged his tail, but he could not get close up to his master. When
Ulysses saw the dog on the other side of the yard, dashed a tear from
his eyes without Eumaeus seeing it, and said: 

"Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap:
his build is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is he
only one of those dogs that come begging about a table, and are kept
merely for show?" 

"This hound," answered Eumaeus, "belonged to him who has died in a
far country. If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he
would soon show you what he could do. There was not a wild beast in
the forest that could get away from him when he was once on its tracks.
But now he has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone,
and the women take no care of him. Servants never do their work when
their master's hand is no longer over them, for Jove takes half the
goodness out of a man when he makes a slave of him." 

As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where the
suitors were, but Argos died as soon as he had recognized his master.

Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned
him to come and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat
lying near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the
suitors; he picked it up, brought it to Telemachus's table, and sat
down opposite him. Then the servant brought him his portion, and gave
him bread from the bread-basket. 

Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poor miserable
old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in rags.
He sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors leading
from the outer to the inner court, and against a bearing-post of cypress-wood
which the carpenter had skillfully planed, and had made to join truly
with rule and line. Telemachus took a whole loaf from the bread-basket,
with as much meat as he could hold in his two hands, and said to Eumaeus,
"Take this to the stranger, and tell him to go the round of the suitors,
and beg from them; a beggar must not be shamefaced." 

So Eumaeus went up to him and said, "Stranger, Telemachus sends you
this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for
beggars must not be shamefaced." 

Ulysses answered, "May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus,
and fulfil the desire of his heart." 

Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid
it on the dirty old wallet at his feet. He went on eating it while
the bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as he left
off. The suitors applauded the bard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses
and prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors,
that he might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good
from the bad; but come what might she was not going to save a single
one of them. Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left
to right, and stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a real
beggar. Some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking
one another who he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd
Melanthius said, "Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something
about him, for I have seen him before. The swineherd brought him here,
but I know nothing about the man himself, nor where he comes from."

On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd. "You precious idiot,"
he cried, "what have you brought this man to town for? Have we not
tramps and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat?
Do you think it a small thing that such people gather here to waste
your master's property and must you needs bring this man as well?"

And Eumaeus answered, "Antinous, your birth is good but your words
evil. It was no doing of mine that he came here. Who is likely to
invite a stranger from a foreign country, unless it be one of those
who can do public service as a seer, a healer of hurts, a carpenter,
or a bard who can charm us with his Such men are welcome all the world
over, but no one is likely to ask a beggar who will only worry him.
You are always harder on Ulysses' servants than any of the other suitors
are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long as Telemachus
and Penelope are alive and here." 

But Telemachus said, "Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has the bitterest
tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse."

Then turning to Antinous he said, "Antinous, you take as much care
of my interests as though I were your son. Why should you want to
see this stranger turned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take' something
and give it him yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it. Never
mind my mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but I
know you will not do what I say, for you are more fond of eating things
yourself than of giving them to other people." 

"What do you mean, Telemachus," replied Antinous, "by this swaggering
talk? If all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, he would
not come here again for another three months." 

As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet from
under the table, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses,
but the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet
with bread and meat; he was about, therefore, to go back to the threshold
and eat what the suitors had given him, but he first went up to Antinous
and said: 

"Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here;
you seem to be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should
be the better giver, and I will tell far and wide of your bounty.
I too was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those
days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might
be nor what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other
things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy,
but it pleased Jove to take all away from me. He sent me with a band
of roving robbers to Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undone
by it. I stationed my bade ships in the river Aegyptus, and bade my
men stay by them and keep guard over them, while sent out scouts to
reconnoitre from every point of vantage. 

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged
the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives
and children captives. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and
when they heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till
the plain was filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam
of armour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no
longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians
killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for
them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who met them, to take
to Cyprus, Dmetor by name, son of Iasus, who was a great man in Cyprus.
Thence I am come hither in a state of great misery." 

Then Antinous said, "What god can have sent such a pestilence to plague
us during our dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court, or
I will give you Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence and
importunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given
you lavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to
be free with other people's property when there is plenty of it."

On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, "Your looks, my fine
sir, are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house
you would not spare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though
you are in another man's, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot
find it in you to give him even a piece of bread." 

This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, "You
shall pay for this before you get clear of the court." With these
words he threw a footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder-blade
near the top of his back. Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow
did not even stagger him, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded
on his revenge. Then he went back to the threshold and sat down there,
laying his well-filled wallet at his feet. 

"Listen to me," he cried, "you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may
speak even as I am minded. A man knows neither ache nor pain if he
gets hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle;
and even so Antinous has hit me while in the service of my miserable
belly, which is always getting people into trouble. Still, if the
poor have gods and avenging deities at all, I pray them that Antinous
may come to a bad end before his marriage." 

"Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off elsewhere,"
shouted Antinous. "If you say more I will have you dragged hand and
foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you alive."

The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young
men said, "Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a
tramp: it will be worse for you if he should turn out to be some god-
and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as people
from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who do amiss
and who righteously." 

Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed. Meanwhile Telemachus
was furious about the blow that had been given to his father, and
though no tear fell from him, he shook his head in silence and brooded
on his revenge. 

Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the banqueting-cloister,
she said before her maids, "Would that Apollo would so strike you,
Antinous," and her waiting woman Eurynome answered, "If our prayers
were answered not one of the suitors would ever again see the sun
rise." Then Penelope said, "Nurse, I hate every single one of them,
for they mean nothing but mischief, but I hate Antinous like the darkness
of death itself. A poor unfortunate tramp has come begging about the
house for sheer want. Every one else has given him something to put
in his wallet, but Antinous has hit him on the right shoulder-blade
with a footstool." 

Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in
the meantime Ulysses was getting his dinner. Then she called for the
swineherd and said, "Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here,
I want to see him and ask him some questions. He seems to have travelled
much, and he may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "If these Achaeans, Madam,
would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his
adventures. I had him three days and three nights with me in my hut,
which was the first place he reached after running away from his ship,
and he has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. If he had
been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose
lips all hearers hang entranced, I could not have been more charmed
as I sat in my hut and listened to him. He says there is an old friendship
between his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes from Crete
where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hither
and thither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he
has heard of Ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the Thesprotians,
and that he is bringing great wealth home with him." 

"Call him here, then," said Penelope, "that I too may hear his story.
As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as
they will, for they have nothing to fret about. Their corn and wine
remain unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume
them, while they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing
our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving
so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate
can stand such recklessness, for we have now no Ulysses to protect
us. If he were to come again, he and his son would soon have their
revenge." 

As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house resounded
with it. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to Eumaeus,
"Go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed just
as I was speaking? This can only mean that all the suitors are going
to be killed, and that not one of them shall escape. Furthermore I
say, and lay my saying to your heart: if I am satisfied that the stranger
is speaking the truth I shall give him a shirt and cloak of good wear."

When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, "Father
stranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for
you; she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can
tell her about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking
the truth, she will give you a shirt and cloak, which are the very
things that you are most in want of. As for bread, you can get enough
of that to fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting
those give that will." 

"I will tell Penelope," answered Ulysses, "nothing but what is strictly
true. I know all about her husband, and have been partner with him
in affliction, but I am afraid of passing. through this crowd of cruel
suitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven. Just now, moreover,
as I was going about the house without doing any harm, a man gave
me a blow that hurt me very much, but neither Telemachus nor any one
else defended me. Tell Penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait
till sundown. Let her give me a seat close up to the fire, for my
clothes are worn very thin- you know they are, for you have seen them
ever since I first asked you to help me- she can then ask me about
the return of her husband." 

The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as she
saw him cross the threshold, "Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus?
Is he afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of coming
inside the house at all? Beggars should not be shamefaced."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "The stranger is quite
reasonable. He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any
one else would do. He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be
much better, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when
you can hear him and talk to him as you will." 

"The man is no fool," answered Penelope, "it would very likely be
as he says, for there are no such abominable people in the whole world
as these men are." 

When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he
had explained everything. Then he went up to Telemachus and said in
his ear so that none could overhear him, "My dear sir, I will now
go back to the pigs, to see after your property and my own business.
You will look to what is going on here, but above all be careful to
keep out of danger, for there are many who bear you ill will. May
Jove bring them to a bad end before they do us a mischief."

"Very well," replied Telemachus, "go home when you have had your dinner,
and in the morning come here with the victims we are to sacrifice
for the day. Leave the rest to heaven and me." 

On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished his
dinner he left the courts and the cloister with the men at table,
and went back to his pigs. As for the suitors, they presently began
to amuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting
on towards evening. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XVIII

Now there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all
over the city of Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton
and drunkard. This man had no strength nor stay in him, but he was
a great hulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother
gave him, was Arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him Irus,
because he used to run errands for any one who would send him. As
soon as he came he began to insult Ulysses, and to try and drive him
out of his own house. 

"Be off, old man," he cried, "from the doorway, or you shall be dragged
out neck and heels. Do you not see that they are all giving me the
wink, and wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like
to do so? Get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows."

Ulysses frowned on him and said, "My friend, I do you no manner of
harm; people give you a great deal, but I am not jealous. There is
room enough in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge
me things that are not yours to give. You seem to be just such another
tramp as myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by
and by. Do not, however, talk too much about fighting or you will
incense me, and old though I am, I shall cover your mouth and chest
with blood. I shall have more peace to-morrow if I do, for you will
not come to the house of Ulysses any more." 

Irus was very angry and answered, "You filthy glutton, you run on
trippingly like an old fish-fag. I have a good mind to lay both hands
about you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar's
tusks. Get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and
look on. You will never be able to fight one who is so much younger
than yourself." 

Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front
of the doorway, and when Antinous saw what was going on he laughed
heartily and said to the others, "This is the finest sport that you
ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house.
The stranger and Irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us
set them on to do so at once." 

The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged
tramps. "Listen to me," said Antinous, "there are some goats' paunches
down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set
aside for supper; he who is victorious and proves himself to be the
better man shall have his pick of the lot; he shall be free of our
table and we will not allow any other beggar about the house at all."

The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said,
"Sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold
his own against a young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on,
though I know it can only end in my getting a drubbing. You must swear,
however that none of you will give me a foul blow to favour Irus and
secure him the victory." 

They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oath
Telemachus put in a word and said, "Stranger, if you have a mind to
settle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here. Whoever
strikes you will have to fight more than one. I am host, and the other
chiefs, Antinous and Eurymachus, both of them men of understanding,
are of the same mind as I am." 

Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins,
thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and
his mighty arms; but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs even
stronger still. The suitors were beyond measure astonished, and one
would turn towards his neighbour saying, "The stranger has brought
such a thigh out of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left
of Irus." 

Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girded
him by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in
such a fright that his limbs were all of a tremble. Antinous scolded
him and said, "You swaggering bully, you ought never to have been
born at all if you are afraid of such an old broken-down creature
as this tramp is. I say, therefore- and it shall surely be- if he
beats you and proves himself the better man, I shall pack you off
on board ship to the mainland and send you to king Echetus, who kills
every one that comes near him. He will cut off your nose and ears,
and draw out your entrails for the dogs to eat." 

This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middle
of the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. Then Ulysses
considered whether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an
end of him then and there, or whether he should give him a lighter
blow that should only knock him down; in the end he deemed it best
to give the lighter blow for fear the Achaeans should begin to suspect
who he was. Then they began to fight, and Irus hit Ulysses on the
right shoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck under the
ear that broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing
out of his mouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth
and kicking on the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and
nearly died of laughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot
and dragged him into the outer court as far as the gate-house. There
he propped him up against the wall and put his staff in his hands.
"Sit here," said he, "and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are a pitiful
creature, and if you try to make yourself king of the beggars any
more you shall fare still worse." 

Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn, over his
shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down
upon the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing
and saluting him, "May Jove, and all the other gods," said they, 'grant
you whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of
this insatiable tramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently,
to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him."

Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat's
paunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves
out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he
did so in a golden goblet of wine. "Good luck to you," he said, "father
stranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have
better times by and by." 

To this Ulysses answered, "Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good
understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are.
I have heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium,
a man both brave and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you
appear to be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed
to what I am saying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that have
their being upon earth. As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and
strength, he thinks that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even
when the blessed gods bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs
must, and makes the best of it; for God Almighty gives men their daily
minds day by day. I know all about it, for I was a rich man once,
and did much wrong in the stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence
that my father and my brothers would support me; therefore let a man
fear God in all things always, and take the good that heaven may see
fit to send him without vainglory. Consider the infamy of what these
suitors are doing; see how they are wasting the estate, and doing
dishonour to the wife, of one who is certain to return some day, and
that, too, not long hence. Nay, he will be here soon; may heaven send
you home quietly first that you may not meet with him in the day of
his coming, for once he is here the suitors and he will not part bloodlessly."

With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he
put the gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away
serious and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he
did not escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him fall by the
hand of Telemachus. So he took his seat again at the place from which
he had come. 

Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the
suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and
win still further honour from her son and husband. So she feigned
a mocking laugh and said, "Eurynome, I have changed my and have a
fancy to show myself to the suitors although I detest them. I should
like also to give my son a hint that he had better not have anything
more to do with them. They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief."

"My dear child," answered Eurynome, "all that you have said is true,
go and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint
your face. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears;
it is not right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus,
whom you always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is
already grown up." 

"I know, Eurynome," replied Penelope, "that you mean well, but do
not try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed
me of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell
Autonoe and Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when
I am in the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would
not be proper for me to do so." 

On this the old woman went out of the room to bid the maids go to
their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another matter,
and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on her
couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed
grace and beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her.
She washed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears
when she goes dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of
a more commanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter
than sawn ivory. When Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon
the maids came in from the women's room and woke Penelope with the
sound of their talking. 

"What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having," said she,
as she passed her hands over her face, "in spite of all my misery.
I wish Diana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment,
that I might no longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband,
who possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished
man among the Achaeans." 

With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but
attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,
holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on either
side of her. As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and
became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he might
win her for his own bed fellow. 

"Telemachus," said she, addressing her son, "I fear you are no longer
so discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were younger
you had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown
up, though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of
a well-to-do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct
is by no means what it should be. What is all this disturbance that
has been going on, and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully
ill-treated? What would have happened if he had suffered serious injury
while a suppliant in our house? Surely this would have been very discreditable
to you." 

"I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure," replied
Telemachus, "I understand all about it and know when things are not
as they should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot,
however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and
then another of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my
mind, and I have no one to stand by me. After all, however, this fight
between Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant
it to do, for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers
of yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish they might
all be as limp as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court.
See how he nods his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing
that he cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever
that may be, for has no strength left in him." 

Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, "Queen Penelope,
daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could see
you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your house
by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the whole
world both as regards personal beauty and strength of understanding."

To this Penelope replied, "Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my
beauty whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy
and my dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after
my affairs, I should both be more respected and show a better presence
to the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. My husband foresaw it all,
and when he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand- 'Wife,
'he said, 'we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for the
Trojans fight well both with bow and spear. They are excellent also
at fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight
sooner than this. I know not, therefore, whether heaven will send
me back to you, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy. In the
meantime do you look after things here. Take care of my father and
mother as at present, and even more so during my absence, but when
you see our son growing a beard, then marry whom you will, and leave
this your present home. This is what he said and now it is all coming
true. A night will come when I shall have to yield myself to a marriage
which I detest, for Jove has taken from me all hope of happiness.
This further grief, moreover, cuts me to the very heart. You suitors
are not wooing me after the custom of my country. When men are courting
a woman who they think will be a good wife to them and who is of noble
birth, and when they are each trying to win her for himself, they
usually bring oxen and sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and
they make her magnificent presents, instead of eating up other people's
property without paying for it." 

This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying
to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair
words which he knew she did not mean. 

Then Antinous said, "Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as
many presents as you please from any one who will give them to you;
it is not well to refuse a present; but we will not go about our business
nor stir from where we are, till you have married the best man among
us whoever he may be." 

The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his
servant to bring his present. Antinous's man returned with a large
and lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifully
made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachus
immediately brought her a magnificent chain of gold and amber beads
that gleamed like sunlight. Eurydamas's two men returned with some
earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most
beautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a necklace
of the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautiful
present of some kind. 

Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought
the presents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and
dancing, and stayed till evening came. They danced and sang till it
grew dark; they then brought in three braziers to give light, and
piled them up with chopped firewood very and dry, and they lit torches
from them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. Then Ulysses
said: 

"Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the
queen inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick
wool. I will hold the light for all these people. They may stay till
morning, but shall not beat me, for I can stand a great deal."

The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho
began to gibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, but
had been brought up by Penelope, who used to give her toys to play
with, and looked after her when she was a child; but in spite of all
this she showed no consideration for the sorrows of her mistress,
and used to misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with whom she was
in love. 

"Poor wretch," said she, "are you gone clean out of your mind? Go
and sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering
here. Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters-
so many of them too? Has the wine been getting into your head, or
do you always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits
because you beat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than
he does not come and cudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding
out of the house." 

"Vixen," replied Ulysses, scowling at her, "I will go and tell Telemachus
what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb from limb."

With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body
of the house. They trembled all aver, for they thought he would do
as he said. But Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers,
holding up torches and looking at the people- brooding the while on
things that should surely come to pass. 

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their insolence,
for she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against them; she
therefore set Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him, which made
the others laugh. "Listen to me," said he, "you suitors of Queen Penelope,
that I may speak even as I am minded. It is not for nothing that this
man has come to the house of Ulysses; I believe the light has not
been coming from the torches, but from his own head- for his hair
is all gone, every bit of it." 

Then turning to Ulysses he said, "Stranger, will you work as a servant,
if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can you
build a stone fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the year
round, and will find you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then?
Not you; for you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work;
you had rather fill your belly by going round the country begging."

"Eurymachus," answered Ulysses, "if you and I were to work one against
the other in early summer when the days are at their longest- give
me a good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which
will fast the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when
the mowing grass is about. Or if you will plough against me, let us
each take a yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and
endurance: turn me into a four acre field, and see whether you or
I can drive the straighter furrow. If, again, war were to break out
this day, give me a shield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting
well upon my temples- you would find me foremost in the fray, and
would cease your gibes about my belly. You are insolent and cruel,
and think yourself a great man because you live in a little world,
ind that a bad one. If Ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of
his house are wide, but you will find them narrow when you try to
fly through them." 

Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, "You
wretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me,
and in public too. Has the wine been getting into your head or do
you always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because
you beat the tramp Irus. With this he caught hold of a footstool,
but Ulysses sought protection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium,
for he was afraid. The stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and
knocked him down: the man fell with a cry flat on his back, and his
wine-jug fell ringing to the ground. The suitors in the covered cloister
were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying,
"I wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, bad luck to hide, for
all the trouble he gives us. We cannot permit such disturbance about
a beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail we shall have no more
pleasure at our banquet." 

On this Telemachus came forward and said, "Sirs, are you mad? Can
you not carry your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit
has possessed you. I do not wish to drive any of you away, but you
have had your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better."

The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
but Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, "Do
not let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer.
Neither let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses'
servants. Let the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that
we may make them and go home to our rest. As for the stranger, let
us leave Telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house that
he has come." 

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of
Dulichium, servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water
and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made
their drink-offerings to the blessed gods: Then, when they had made
their drink-offerings and had drunk each one as he was minded, they
took their several ways each of them to his own abode. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIX

Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby
with Minerva's help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently
he said to Telemachus, "Telemachus, we must get the armour together
and take it down inside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you
why you have removed it. Say that you have taken it to be out of the
way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses
went away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this
more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel
over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may
disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes
tempts people to use them." 

Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse
Euryclea and said, "Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while
I take the armour that my father left behind him down into the store
room. No one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got
all smirched with soot during my own boyhood. I want to take it down
where the smoke cannot reach it." 

"I wish, child," answered Euryclea, "that you would take the management
of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the
property yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to the
store room? The maids would have so, but you would not let them.

"The stranger," said Telemachus, "shall show me a light; when people
eat my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from."

Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.
Then Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields,
and spears inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in
her hand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus
said, "Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the
rafters, crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow
as with a flaming fire. Surely there is some god here who has come
down from heaven." 

"Hush," answered Ulysses, "hold your peace and ask no questions, for
this is the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leave me
here to talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief
will ask me all sorts of questions." 

On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner
court, to the room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bed
till morning, while Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on
the means whereby with Minerva's help he might be able to kill the
suitors. 

Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana,
and they set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near
the fire in her accustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and
had a footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was
covered with a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came
from the women's room to join her. They set about removing the tables
at which the wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread
that was left, with the cups from which they had drunk. They emptied
the embers out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to
give both light and heat; but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a
second time and said, "Stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging
about the house all night and spying upon the women? Be off, you wretch,
outside, and eat your supper there, or you shall be driven out with
a firebrand." 

Ulysses scowled at her and answered, "My good woman, why should you
be so angry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes
are all in rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about after
the manner of tramps and beggars generall? I too was a rich man once,
and had a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp
such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I
had any number of servants, and all the other things which people
have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove
to take all away from me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come
to lose that pride and place in which you now wanton above your fellows;
have a care lest you get out of favour with your mistress, and lest
Ulysses should come home, for there is still a chance that he may
do so. Moreover, though he be dead as you think he is, yet by Apollo's
will he has left a son behind him, Telemachus, who will note anything
done amiss by the maids in the house, for he is now no longer in his
boyhood." 

Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, "Impudent
baggage, said she, "I see how abominably you are behaving, and you
shall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself,
that I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband,
for whose sake I am in such continual sorrow." 

Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, "Bring a seat with
a fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his
story, and listens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions."

Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as
soon as Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, "Stranger,
I shall first ask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town
and parents." 

"Madam;" answered Ulysses, "who on the face of the whole earth can
dare to chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven
itself; you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness,
as the monarch over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its
wheat and barley, the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring
forth lambs, and the sea abounds with fish by reason of his virtues,
and his people do good deeds under him. Nevertheless, as I sit here
in your house, ask me some other question and do not seek to know
my race and family, or you will recall memories that will yet more
increase my sorrow. I am full of heaviness, but I ought not to sit
weeping and wailing in another person's house, nor is it well to be
thus grieving continually. I shall have one of the servants or even
yourself complaining of me, and saying that my eyes swim with tears
because I am heavy with wine." 

Then Penelope answered, "Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty,
whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and
my dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my
affairs I should be both more respected and should show a better presence
to the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. The chiefs from all our
islands- Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself,
are wooing me against my will and are wasting my estate. I can therefore
show no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who
say that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time brokenhearted
about Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, and I have to
invent stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heaven
put it in my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and
to begin working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I
said to them, 'Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not
press me to marry again immediately; wait- for I would not have my
skill in needlework perish unrecorded- till I have finished making
a pall for the hero Laertes, to be ready against the time when death
shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk
if he is laid out without a pall.' This was what I said, and they
assented; whereon I used to keep working at my great web all day long,
but at night I would unpick the stitches again by torch light. I fooled
them in this way for three years without their finding it out, but
as time wore on and I was now in my fourth year, in the waning of
moons, and many days had been accomplished, those good-for-nothing
hussies my maids betrayed me to the suitors, who broke in upon me
and caught me; they were very angry with me, so I was forced to finish
my work whether I would or no. And now I do not see how I can find
any further shift for getting out of this marriage. My parents are
putting great pressure upon me, and my son chafes at the ravages the
suitors are making upon his estate, for he is now old enough to understand
all about it and is perfectly able to look after his own affairs,
for heaven has blessed him with an excellent disposition. Still, notwithstanding
all this, tell me who you are and where you come from- for you must
have had father and mother of some sort; you cannot be the son of
an oak or of a rock." 

Then Ulysses answered, "madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist
in asking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs
me: people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as
long as I have, and suffered as much among as many peoples. Nevertheless,
as regards your question I will tell you all you ask. There is a fair
and fruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it is thickly peopled
and there are nine cities in it: the people speak many different languages
which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave Eteocretans,
Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is a great town
there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years had a conference
with Jove himself. Minos was father to Deucalion, whose son I am,
for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneus sailed
for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my brother,
however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the two; hence
it was in Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed him hospitality, for
the winds took him there as he was on his way to Troy, carrying him
out of his course from cape Malea and leaving him in Amnisus off the
cave of Ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to enter and he
could hardly find shelter from the winds that were then xaging. As
soon as he got there he went into the town and asked for Idomeneus,
claiming to be his old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had already
set sail for Troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so I took him to
my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I had abundance
of everything. Moreover, I fed the men who were with him with barley
meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine and oxen
for them to sacrifice to their heart's content. They stayed with me
twelve days, for there was a gale blowing from the North so strong
that one could hardly keep one's feet on land. I suppose some unfriendly
god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day the wind dropped,
and they got away." 

Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept
as she listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon
the mountain tops when the winds from South East and West have breathed
upon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even
so did her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all
the time sitting by her side. Ulysses felt for her and was for her,
but he kept his eyes as hard as or iron without letting them so much
as quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears. Then, when she
had relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said:
"Now, stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no
you really did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did.
Tell me, then, how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look
at, and so also with his companions." 

"Madam," answered Ulysses, "it is such a long time ago that I can
hardly say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home,
and went elsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect.
Ulysses wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened
by a gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of this
there was a device that showed a dog holding a spotted fawn between
his fore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground.
Every one marvelled at the way in which these things had been done
in gold, the dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the
fawn was struggling convulsively to escape. As for the shirt that
he wore next his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the
skin of an onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration
of all the women who beheld it. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying
to your heart, that I do not know whether Ulysses wore these clothes
when he left home, or whether one of his companions had given them
to him while he was on his voyage; or possibly some one at whose house
he was staying made him a present of them, for he was a man of many
friends and had few equals among the Achaeans. I myself gave him a
sword of bronze and a beautiful purple mantle, double lined, with
a shirt that went down to his feet, and I sent him on board his ship
with every mark of honour. He had a servant with him, a little older
than himself, and I can tell you what he was like; his shoulders were
hunched, he was dark, and he had thick curly hair. His name was Eurybates,
and Ulysses treated him with greater familiarity than he did any of
the others, as being the most like-minded with himself."

Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable
proofs that Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found
relief in tears she said to him, "Stranger, I was already disposed
to pity you, but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome
in my house. It was I who gave Ulysses the clothes you speak of. I
took them out of the store room and folded them up myself, and I gave
him also the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never
welcome him home again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out
for that detested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even
to mention." 

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure yourself
further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can hardly
blame you for doing so. A woman who has loved her husband and borne
him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even though
he were a worse man than Ulysses, who they say was like a god. Still,
cease your tears and listen to what I can tell I will hide nothing
from you, and can say with perfect truth that I have lately heard
of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home; he is among the Thesprotians,
and is bringing back much valuable treasure that he has begged from
one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew were lost as
they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and the sun-god
were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the sun-god's
cattle, and they were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses stuck to the
keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the Phaecians,
who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him as though
he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing to escort
him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses would have been here long
ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gathering wealth;
for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is no one
can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all
this, and he swore to me- making drink-offerings in his house as he
did so- that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who
would take Ulysses to his own country. He sent me off first, for there
happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island
of Dulichium, but he showed me all treasure Ulysses had got together,
and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keep his family
for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona
that he might learn Jove's mind from the high oak tree, and know whether
after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly or in secret.
So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is close at
hand and cannot remain away from home much longer; nevertheless I
will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who is the first
and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of Ulysses
to which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surely come
to pass. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end
of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here."

"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if your words come true you
shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see
you shall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysses
will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely
as that Ulysses ever was, there are now no longer any such masters
in the house as he was, to receive honourable strangers or to further
them on their way home. And now, you maids, wash his feet for him,
and make him a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may
be warm and quiet till morning. Then, at day break wash him and anoint
him again, that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with
Telemachus. It shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people
who is uncivil to him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do
in this house. For how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or
no I am superior to others of my sex both in goodness of heart and
understanding, if I let you dine in my cloisters squalid and ill clad?
Men live but for a little season; if they are hard, and deal hardly,
people wish them ill so long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously
of them when they are dead, but he that is righteous and deals righteously,
the people tell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call
him blessed." 

Ulysses answered, "Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from
the day that I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard.
I will lie as I have lain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night
after night have I passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited
for morning. Nor, again, do I like having my feet washed; I shall
not let any of the young hussies about your house touch my feet; but,
if you have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as
much trouble as I have, I will allow her to wash them." 

To this Penelope said, "My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet
came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with
such admirable propriety as you do. There happens to be in the house
a most respectable old woman- the same who received my poor dear husband
in her arms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy. She
is very feeble now, but she shall wash your feet." "Come here," said
she, "Euryclea, and wash your master's age-mate; I suppose Ulysses'
hands and feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble
ages all of us dreadfully fast." 

On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she
began to weep and made lamentation saying, "My dear child, I cannot
think whatever I am to do with you. I am certain no one was ever more
god-fearing than yourself, and yet Jove hates you. No one in the whole
world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs
when you prayed you might come to a green old age yourself and see
your son grow up to take after you; yet see how he has prevented you
alone from ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubt the
women in some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at
him as all these sluts here have been gibing you. I do not wonder
at your not choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which
they have insulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough,
as Penelope has said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for
Penelope's sake and for your own, for you have raised the most lively
feelings of compassion in my mind; and let me say this moreover, which
pray attend to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come
here before now, but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came
who was so like Ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are."

"Those who have seen us both," answered Ulysses, "have always said
we were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too.

Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash
his feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till
the bath was warm enough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he
turned away from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old
woman had hold of his leg she would recognize a certain scar which
it bore, whereon the whole truth would come out. And indeed as soon
as she began washing her master, she at once knew the scar as one
that had been given him by a wild boar when he was hunting on Mount
Parnassus with his excellent grandfather Autolycus- who was the most
accomplished thief and perjurer in the whole world- and with the sons
of Autolycus. Mercury himself had endowed him with this gift, for
he used to burn the thigh bones of goats and kids to him, so he took
pleasure in his companionship. It happened once that Autolycus had
gone to Ithaca and had found the child of his daughter just born.
As soon as he had done supper Euryclea set the infant upon his knees
and said, you must find a name for your grandson; you greatly wished
that you might have one." 

'Son-in-law and daughter," replied Autolycus, "call the child thus:
I am highly displeased with a large number of people in one place
and another, both men and women; so name the child 'Ulysses,' or the
child of anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother's family
on Mount Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present
and will send him on his way rejoicing." 

Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from Autolycus,
who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome. His grandmother
Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head, and both
his beautiful eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to get dinner
ready, and they did as he told them. They brought in a five year old
bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints; these they
then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them; they roasted
them sufficiently and served the portions round. Thus through the
livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and every
man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun
set and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of
sleep. 

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons
of Autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went
too. They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached
its breezy upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon
the fields, fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Oceanus, they
came to a mountain dell. The dogs were in front searching for the
tracks of the beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons
of Autolycus, among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he
had a long spear in his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among
some thick brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get
through it, nor could the sun's rays pierce it, and the ground underneath
lay thick with fallen leaves. The boar heard the noise of the men's
feet, and the hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up
to him, so rushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck,
and stood at bay with fire flashing from his eyes. Ulysses was the
first to raise his spear and try to drive it into the brute, but the
boar was too quick for him, and charged him sideways, ripping him
above the knee with a gash that tore deep though it did not reach
the bone. As for the boar, Ulysses hit him on the right shoulder,
and the point of the spear went right through him, so that he fell
groaning in the dust until the life went out of him. The sons of Autolycus
busied themselves with the carcass of the boar, and bound Ulysses'
wound; then, after saying a spell to stop the bleeding, they went
home as fast as they could. But when Autolycus and his sons had thoroughly
healed Ulysses, they made him some splendid presents, and sent him
back to Ithaca with much mutual good will. When he got back, his father
and mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked him all about it, and
how he had hurt himself to get the scar; so he told them how the boar
had ripped him when he was out hunting with Autolycus and his sons
on Mount Parnassus. 

As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had
well hold of it, she recognized it and dropped the foot at once. The
leg fell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that
all the water was spilt on the ground; Euryclea's eyes between her
joy and her grief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but
she caught Ulysses by the beard and said, "My dear child, I am sure
you must be Ulysses himself, only I did not know you till I had actually
touched and handled you." 

As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell
her that her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable
to look in that direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva
had diverted her attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat
with his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said,
"Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed me at your
own breast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at last
come to my own home again? Since it has been borne in upon you by
heaven to recognize me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about
it any one else in the house, for if you do I tell you- and it shall
surely be- that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors,
I will not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing
the other women." 

"My child," answered Euryclea, "what are you talking about? You know
very well that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold my
tongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and
lay my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors
into your hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who
have been ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless." 

And Ulysses answered, "Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way;
I am well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold
your tongue and leave everything to heaven." 

As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water,
for the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and
anointed him with oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to
warm himself, and hid the scar under his rags. Then Penelope began
talking to him and said: 

"Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter.
It is indeed nearly bed time- for those, at least, who can sleep in
spite of sorrow. As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such
unmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties
and looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during
the whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed,
I lie awake thinking, and my heart comes a prey to the most incessant
and cruel tortures. As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus,
sings in the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and
with many a plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed
her own child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss
and turn in its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here,
and safeguard my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house,
out of regard to public opinion and the memory of my late husband,
or whether it is not now time for me to go with the best of these
suitors who are wooing me and making me such magnificent presents.
As long as my son was still young, and unable to understand, he would
not hear of my leaving my husband's house, but now that he is full
grown he begs and prays me to do so, being incensed at the way in
which the suitors are eating up his property. Listen, then, to a dream
that I have had and interpret it for me if you can. I have twenty
geese about the house that eat mash out of a trough, and of which
I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a great eagle came swooping
down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak into the neck of each
of them till he had killed them all. Presently he soared off into
the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard; whereon I wept in
my room till all my maids gathered round me, so piteously was I grieving
because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he came back again, and
perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with human voice, and
told me to leave off crying. 'Be of good courage,' he said, 'daughter
of Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omen that shall
surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am no longer
an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who will
bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.' On this I woke, and when
I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as usual."

"This dream, Madam," replied Ulysses, "can admit but of one interpretation,
for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be fulfilled? The
death of the suitors is portended, and not one single one of them
will escape." 

And Penelope answered, "Stranger, dreams are very curious and unaccountable
things, and they do not by any means invariably come true. There are
two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies proceed; the one
is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that come through the gate
of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean something
to those that see them. I do not think, however, that my own dream
came through the gate of horn, though I and my son should be most
thankful if it proves to have done so. Furthermore I say- and lay
my saying to your heart- the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened
day that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about
to hold a tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes
in the court, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which
a ship is built; he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow
through the whole twelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same
thing, and whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send
his arrow through all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit
this house of my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth.
But even so, I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams."

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam wife of Ulysses, you need not defer
your tournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string
the bow, handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the
iron." 

To this Penelope said, "As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk
to me, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot do
permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on
earth a time for all things. I will therefore go upstairs and recline
upon that couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears from
the day Ulysses set out for the city with a hateful name."

She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by
her maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva
shed sweet sleep over her eyelids. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XX

Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock's hide, on
the top of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had
eaten, and Eurynome threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself
down. There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in
which he should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had
been in the habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the
house giggling and laughing with one another. This made Ulysses very
angry, and he doubted whether to get up and kill every single one
of them then and there, or to let them sleep one more and last time
with the suitors. His heart growled within him, and as a bitch with
puppies growls and shows her teeth when she sees a stranger, so did
his heart growl with anger at the evil deeds that were being done:
but he beat his breast and said, "Heart, be still, you had worse than
this to bear on the day when the terrible Cyclops ate your brave companions;
yet you bore it in silence till your cunning got you safe out of the
cave, though you made sure of being killed." 

Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but
he tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in
front of a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other,
that he may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn
himself about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single
handed as he was, he should contrive to kill so large a body of men
as the wicked suitors. But by and by Minerva came down from heaven
in the likeness of a woman, and hovered over his head saying, "My
poor unhappy man, why do you lie awake in this way? This is your house:
your wife is safe inside it, and so is your son who is just such a
young man as any father may be proud of." 

"Goddess," answered Ulysses, "all that you have said is true, but
I am in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked
suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always are.
And there is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable.
Supposing that with Jove's and your assistance I succeed in killing
them, I must ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their
avengers when it is all over." 

"For shame," replied Minerva, "why, any one else would trust a worse
ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less
wise than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout
in all your troubles? I tell you plainly that even though there were
fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you should
take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you. But
go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you
shall be out of your troubles before long." 

As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to Olympus.

While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that
eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting
up in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping
she prayed to Diana saying, "Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove,
drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch
me up and bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the
mouths of overflowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus.
The daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods
killed them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took care of them,
and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them to
excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them
an imposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of
accomplishment; but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see
Jove about getting them married (for well does he know both what shall
happen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came and
spirited them away to become handmaids to the dread Erinyes. Even
so I wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide me from mortal
sight, or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain go even
beneath the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses
only, and without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was.
Besides, no matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put
up with it so long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are
closed in slumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery
haunts me even in my dreams. This very night methought there was one
lying by my side who was like Ulysses as he was when he went away
with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no dream,
but the very truth itself." 

On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping,
and it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and
was by his side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on
which he had lain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he
took the bullock's hide out into the open. He lifted up his hands
to heaven, and prayed, saying "Father Jove, since you have seen fit
to bring me over land and sea to my own home after all the afflictions
you have laid upon me, give me a sign out of the mouth of some one
or other of those who are now waking within the house, and let me
have another sign of some kind from outside." 

Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high
up among the from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad when
he heard it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from
hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another
sign. There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind
wheat and barley which are the staff of life. The others had ground
their task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet
finished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard
the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master.
"Father Jove," said she, "you who rule over heaven and earth, you
have thundered from a clear sky without so much as a cloud in it,
and this means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of
me your poor servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very
last day that the suitors dine in the house of Ulysses. They have
worn me out with the labour of grinding meal for them, and I hope
they may never have another dinner anywhere at all." 

Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman's
speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should
avenge himself on the suitors. 

Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about
his shoulder, bound his sandals on his comely feet, and took a doughty
spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the threshold
of the cloister and said to Euryclea, "Nurse, did you make the stranger
comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let him shift
for himself?- for my mother, good woman though she is, has a way of
paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting others
who are in reality much better men." 

"Do not find fault child," said Euryclea, "when there is no one to
find fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he
liked: your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and
he said he would not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants
to make one for him, but he said he was re such wretched outcast that
he would not sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having
an undressed bullock's hide and some sheepskins put for him in the
cloister and I threw a cloak over him myself." 

Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans
were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was
not alone, for his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the
maids and said, "Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and
sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the
seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean
out the mixing-jugs and the cups, and for water from the fountain
at once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early,
for it is a feast day." 

Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily
to work about the house. The men who were in attendance on the suitors
also came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women returned
from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three
best pigs he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises,
and then he said good-humouredly to Ulysses, "Stranger, are the suitors
treating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?"

"May heaven," answered Ulysses, "requite to them the wickedness with
which they deal high-handedly in another man's house without any sense
of shame." 

Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up,
for he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors' dinner;
and he had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the
gatehouse, and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. "Are you still
here, stranger," said he, "to pester people by begging about the house?
Why can you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding
before we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg without
any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the Achaeans,
as well as here?" 

Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third
man, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer
and some goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are there
to take people over when any one comes to them. So Philoetius made
his heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went
up to the swineherd. "Who, Swineherd," said he, "is this stranger
that is lately come here? Is he one of your men? What is his family?
Where does he come from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some
great man, but the gods give sorrow to whom they will- even to kings
if it so pleases them 

As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;
"Good day to you, father stranger," said he, "you seem to be very
poorly off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. Father
Jove, of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children,
yet you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweat
came over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for
he reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags
as this man's are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he is
already dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master,
who made me his stockman when I was quite young among the Cephallenians,
and now his cattle are countless; no one could have done better with
them than I have, for they have bred like ears of corn; nevertheless
I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who take no heed
of his son though he is in the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven,
but are already eager to divide Ulysses' property among them because
he has been away so long. I have often thought- only it would not
be right while his son is living- of going off with the cattle to
some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still harder to
stay here and be ill-treated about other people's herds. My position
is intolerable, and I should long since have run away and put myself
under the protection of some other chief, only that I believe my poor
master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out of the
house." 

"Stockman," answered Ulysses, "you seem to be a very well-disposed
person, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I will
tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath: by Jove, the chief
of all gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come,
Ulysses shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so
minded you shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here."

"If Jove were to bring this to pass," replied the stockman, "you should
see how I would do my very utmost to help him." 

And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot
to murder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand-
an eagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, "My friends,
this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go
to dinner instead." 

The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on
the benches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and
the heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them
round. They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd
gave every man his cup, while Philoetius handed round the bread in
the breadbaskets, and Melanthius poured them out their wine. Then
they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them.

Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister
that was paved with stone; he gave him a shabby-looking seat at a
little table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought
to him, with his wine in a gold cup. "Sit there," said he, "and drink
your wine among the great people. I will put a stop to the gibes and
blows of the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to
Ulysses, and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your
hands and your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief."

The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
then Antinous said, "We do not like such language but we will put
up with it, for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. If Jove
had let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now."

Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile the
heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the
Achaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo. 

Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every
man his portion, and feasted to their hearts' content; those who waited
at table gave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had,
for Telemachus had told them to do so. 

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their insolence,
for she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against them. Now
there happened to be among them a ribald fellow, whose name was Ctesippus,
and who came from Same. This man, confident in his great wealth, was
paying court to the wife of Ulysses, and said to the suitors, "Hear
what I have to say. The stranger has already had as large a portion
as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor reasonable
to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. I will, however,
make him a present on my own account, that he may have something to
give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses' servants."

As he spoke he picked up a heifer's foot from the meat-basket in which
it lay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little
aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion as he did
so, and it hit the wall, not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely
to Ctesippus, "It is a good thing for you," said he, "that the stranger
turned his head so that you missed him. If you had hit him I should
have run you through with my spear, and your father would have had
to see about getting you buried rather than married in this house.
So let me have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am
grown up now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what
is going on, instead of being the child that I have been heretofore.
I have long seen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn
and wine: I have put up with this, for one man is no match for many,
but do me no further violence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill
me; I would far rather die than see such disgraceful scenes day after
day- guests insulted, and men dragging the women servants about the
house in an unseemly way." 

They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said,
"No one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay
it, for it is quite reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating
the stranger, or any one else of the servants who are about the house;
I would say, however, a friendly word to Telemachus and his mother,
which I trust may commend itself to both. 'As long,' I would say,
'as you had ground for hoping that Ulysses would one day come home,
no one could complain of your waiting and suffering the suitors to
be in your house. It would have been better that he should have returned,
but it is now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore
talk all this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry
the best man, and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer.
Thus you will yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and
to eat and drink in peace, while your mother will look after some
other man's house, not yours."' 

To this Telemachus answered, "By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows
of my unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or
is wandering in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way
of my mother's marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever
she will, and I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but
I dare not insist point blank that she shall leave the house against
her own wishes. Heaven forbid that I should do this." 

Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set
their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter.
Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears,
and their hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this
and said, "Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud
of darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet
with tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams
drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are
full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted
out of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land."

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus
then said, "This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark
here." 

But Theoclymenus said, "Eurymachus, you need not send any one with
me. I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing
of an understanding mind. I will take these out of the house with
me, for I see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you
men who are insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of
Ulysses will be able to escape." 

He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him
welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking
Telemachus fly laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said
to him, "Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have
this importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no
skill for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and
now here is another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet.
Let me persuade you, for it will be much better, to put them on board
ship and send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring."

Telemachus gave him no heed, but sat silently watching his father,
expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.

Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had had a rich
seat placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could
hear what every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared
amid merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had sacrificed
many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing can be conceived
more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a brave man were soon
to lay before them- for they had brought their doom upon themselves.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXI

Minerva now put it in Penelope's mind to make the suitors try their
skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,
as a means of bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs
and got the store room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle
of ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store room at the
end of the house, where her husband's treasures of gold, bronze, and
wrought iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver
full of deadly arrows that had been given him by a friend whom he
had met in Lacedaemon- Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell in
with one another in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses
was staying in order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole
people; for the Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from
Ithaca, and had sailed away with them and with their shepherds. In
quest of these Ulysses took a long journey while still quite young,
for his father and the other chieftains sent him on a mission to recover
them. Iphitus had gone there also to try and get back twelve brood
mares that he had lost, and the mule foals that were running with
them. These mares were the death of him in the end, for when he went
to the house of Jove's son, mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies
of valour, Hercules to his shame killed him, though he was his guest,
for he feared not heaven's vengeance, nor yet respected his own table
which he had set before Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything,
and kept the mares himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus
met Ulysses, and gave him the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used
to carry, and which on his death had been left by him to his son.
Ulysses gave him in return a sword and a spear, and this was the beginning
of a fast friendship, although they never visited at one another's
houses, for Jove's son Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do so.
This bow, then, given him by Iphitus, had not been taken with him
by Ulysses when he sailed for Troy; he had used it so long as he had
been at home, but had left it behind as having been a keepsake from
a valued friend. 

Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store room; the
carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to
get it quite straight; he had then set the door posts into it and
hung the doors. She loosed the strap from the handle of the door,
put in the key, and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts
that held the doors; these flew open with a noise like a bull bellowing
in a meadow, and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where
the chests stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by
along with fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow
with its bow case from the peg on which it hung. She sat down with
it on her knees, weeping bitterly as she took the bow out of its case,
and when her tears had relieved her, she went to the cloister where
the suitors were, carrying the bow and the quiver, with the many deadly
arrows that were inside it. Along with her came her maidens, bearing
a chest that contained much iron and bronze which her husband had
won as prizes. When she reached the suitors, she stood by one of the
bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil
before her face, and with a maid on either side of her. Then she said:

"Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality
of this house because its owner has been long absent, and without
other pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the
prize that you are contending for, I will bring out the mighty bow
of Ulysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and
send his arrow through each one of twelve axes, him will I follow
and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding
in wealth. But even so I doubt not that I shall remember it in my
dreams." 

As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron
before the suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she
had bidden him. Hard by, the stockman wept also when he saw his master's
bow, but Antinous scolded them. "You country louts," said he, "silly
simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by
crying in this way? She has enough to grieve her in the loss of her
husband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or
go outside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitors
shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find
it no light matter to string such a bow as this is. There is not a
man of us all who is such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him
and remember him, though I was then only a child." 

This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able
to string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was
to be the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of
Ulysses, whom he was dishonouring in his own house- egging the others
on to do so also. 

Then Telemachus spoke. "Great heavens!" he exclaimed, "Jove must have
robbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying
she will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying
myself as though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the
contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a woman
whose peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet
in Ithaca nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I do; what
need have I to speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no
excuses for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or
no. I too will make trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot
through the iron, I shall not suffer my mother to quit this house
with a stranger, not if I can win the prizes which my father won before
me." 

As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from
him, and took his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in
a row, in a long groove which he had dug for them, and had Wade straight
by line. Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone
was surprised when they saw him set up so orderly, though he had never
seen anything of the kind before. This done, he went on to the pavement
to make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all
his might to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though
he had hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. He was
trying for the fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses
made a sign to check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:

"Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am
too young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able
to hold my own if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are
stronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled."

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that
led into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the
bow. Then he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous
said: 

"Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the
place at which the. cupbearer begins when he is handing round the
wine." 

The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of OEnops was the first to rise.
He was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near
the mixing-bowl. He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and
was indignant with the others. He was now the first to take the bow
and arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he
could not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard
work, they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors,
"My friends, I cannot string it; let another have it; this bow shall
take the life and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better
to die than to live after having missed the prize that we have so
long striven for, and which has brought us so long together. Some
one of us is even now hoping and praying that he may marry Penelope,
but when he has seen this bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal
offerings to some other woman, and let Penelope marry whoever makes
her the best offer and whose lot it is to win her." 

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door, with
the arrow standing against the tip of the bow. Then he took his seat
again on the seat from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him
saying: 

"Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous and
intolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this
bow take the life of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot
bend it yourself? True, you were not born to be an archer, but there
are others who will soon string it." 

Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, "Look sharp, light a fire
in the court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring
us also a large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let
us warm the bow and grease it we will then make trial of it again,
and bring the contest to an end." 

Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside
it. He also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the
house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it,
but they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. Nevertheless
there still remained Antinous and Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders
among the suitors and much the foremost among them all. 

Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and
Ulysses followed them. When they had got outside the gates and the
outer yard, Ulysses said to them quietly: 

"Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I
am in doubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What
manner of men would you be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should
bring him back here all of a sudden? Say which you are disposed to
do- to side with the suitors, or with Ulysses?" 

"Father Jove," answered the stockman, "would indeed that you might
so ordain it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should
see with what might and main I would fight for him." 

In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return;
when, therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses
said, "It is I, Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but at
last, in the twentieth year, I am come back to my own country. I find
that you two alone of all my servants are glad that I should do so,
for I have not heard any of the others praying for my return. To you
two, therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be. If heaven
shall deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both
of you, will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall
be to me as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I
will now give you convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured.
See, here is the scar from the boar's tooth that ripped me when I
was out hunting on Mount Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus."

As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they
had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses,
threw their arms round him and kissed his head and shoulders, while
Ulysses kissed their hands and faces in return. The sun would have
gone down upon their mourning if Ulysses had not checked them and
said: 

"Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us,
and tell those who a are within. When you go in, do so separately,
not both together; I will go first, and do you follow afterwards;
Let this moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of
them try to prevent me from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do
you, therefore, Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying
it about, and tell the women to close the doors of their apartment.
If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house,
they must not come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they
are at their work. And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the
doors of the outer court, and to bind them securely at once."

When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat
that he had left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside.

At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming
it by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly
grieved. He heaved a deep sigh and said, "I grieve for myself and
for us all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but
I do not care nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other
women in Ithaca and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our
being so inferior to Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his
bow. This will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn."

"It shall not be so, Eurymachus," said Antinous, "and you know it
yourself. To-day is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who
can string a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side- as for
the axes they can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come
to the house and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his
cups, that we may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of
the bow; we will tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats to-morrow-
the best he has; we can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty
archer, and again make trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest
to an end." 

The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water
over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls
with wine and water and handed it round after giving every man his
drink-offering. Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk
each as much as he desired, Ulysses craftily said: 

"Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as
I am minded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous
who has just spoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present
and leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give
victory to whom it will. For the moment, however, give me the bow
that I may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether
I still have as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel
and neglect have made an end of it." 

This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the
bow; Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, "Wretched creature,
you have not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought
to think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your
betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others
have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. No other
beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among ourselves;
the wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it does with all
those drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed the Centaur Eurytion
when he was staying with Peirithous among the Lapithae. When the wine
had got into his head he went mad and did ill deeds about the house
of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were there assembled, so
they rushed at him and cut off his ears and nostrils; then they dragged
him through the doorway out of the house, so he went away crazed,
and bore the burden of his crime, bereft of understanding. Henceforth,
therefore, there was war between mankind and the centaurs, but he
brought it upon himself through his own drunkenness. In like manner
I can tell you that it will go hardly with you if you string the bow:
you will find no mercy from any one here, for we shall at once ship
you off to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him:
you will never get away alive, so drink and keep quiet without getting
into a quarrel with men younger than yourself." 

Penelope then spoke to him. "Antinous," said she, "it is not right
that you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this
house. If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty
bow of Ulysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him
and make me his wife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in
his mind: none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would
be out of all reason." 

"Queen Penelope," answered Eurymachus, "we do not suppose that this
man will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid
lest some of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should
go gossiping about and say, 'These suitors are a feeble folk; they
are paying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them
was able to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house
strung it at once and sent an arrow through the iron.' This is what
will be said, and it will be a scandal against us." 

"Eurymachus," Penelope answered, "people who persist in eating up
the estate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not
expect others to think well of them. Why then should you mind if men
talk as you think they will? This stranger is strong and well-built,
he says moreover that he is of noble birth. Give him the bow, and
let us see whether he can string it or no. I say- and it shall surely
be- that if Apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will
give him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off
dogs and robbers, and a sharp sword. I will also give him sandals,
and will see him sent safely whereever he wants to go." 

Then Telemachus said, "Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca
or in the islands that are over against Elis who has the right to
let any one have the bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one
way or the other, not even though I choose to make the stranger a
present of the bow outright, and let him take it away with him. Go,
then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your
loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants. This bow is
a man's matter, and mine above all others, for it is I who am master
here." 

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son's saying
in her heart. Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room,
she mourned her dear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her
eyelids. 

The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses,
but the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters,
and one of them said, "You idiot, where are you taking the bow to?
Are you out of your wits? If Apollo and the other gods will grant
our prayer, your own boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little
place, and worry you to death." 

Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the
bow down then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the
other side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, "Father Eumaeus,
bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you
with stones back to the country, for I am the better man of the two.
I wish I was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house
as I am than you, I would soon send some of them off sick and sorry,
for they mean mischief." 

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put
them in a better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow
on and placed it in the hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he
called Euryclea apart and said to her, "Euryclea, Telemachus says
you are to close the doors of the women's apartments. If they hear
any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are
not to come out, but are to keep quiet and stay where they are at
their work." 

Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women's apartments.

Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of
the outer court. There was a ship's cable of byblus fibre lying in
the gatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in
again, resuming the seat that he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses,
who had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way
about, and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating
into its two horns during his absence. Then would one turn towards
his neighbour saying, "This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either
he has got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlike
style does the old vagabond handle it." 

Another said, "I hope he may be no more successful in other things
than he is likely to be in stringing this bow." 

But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung
it as easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes
the twisted gut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand
to prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the
twittering of a swallow. The suitors were dismayed, and turned colour
as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, Jove thundered loudly
as a sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as he heard the omen
that the son of scheming Saturn had sent him. 

He took an arrow that was lying upon the table- for those which the
Achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver-
he laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the
arrow and the string toward him, still seated on his seat. When he
had taken aim he let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the handle-holes
of the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right through
them, and into the outer courtyard. Then he said to Telemachus:

"Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what
I aimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong,
and not as the suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time
for the Achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight,
and then otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which
are the crowning ornaments of a banquet." 

As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded
on his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father's
seat. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXII

Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement
with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on
to the ground at his feet and said, "The mighty contest is at an end.
I will now see whether Apollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another
mark which no man has yet hit." 

On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take
up a two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in
his hands. He had no thought of death- who amongst all the revellers
would think that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so
many and kill him? The arrow struck Antinous in the throat, and the
point went clean through his neck, so that he fell over and the cup
dropped from his hand, while a thick stream of blood gushed from his
nostrils. He kicked the table from him and upset the things on it,
so that the bread and roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over
on to the ground. The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that
a man had been hit; they sprang in dismay one and all of them from
their seats and looked everywhere towards the walls, but there was
neither shield nor spear, and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily. "Stranger,"
said they, "you shall pay for shooting people in this way: om yi you
shall see no other contest; you are a doomed man; he whom you have
slain was the foremost youth in Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour
you for having killed him." 

Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by mistake,
and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of every
one of them. But Ulysses glared at them and said: 

"Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You have
wasted my substance, have forced my women servants to lie with you,
and have wooed my wife while I was still living. You have feared neither
Cod nor man, and now you shall die." 

They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round
about to see whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone
spoke. 

"If you are Ulysses," said he, "then what you have said is just. We
have done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous
who was the head and front of the offending lies low already. It was
all his doing. It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did
not so much care about that; what he wanted was something quite different,
and Jove has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kill your son
and to be chief man in Ithaca. Now, therefore, that he has met the
death which was his due, spare the lives of your people. We will make
everything good among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that
we have eaten and drunk. Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth
twenty oxen, and we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your
heart is softened. Until we have done this no one can complain of
your being enraged against us." 

Ulysses again glared at him and said, "Though you should give me all
that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have,
I will not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full. You must
fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not a man of you shall."

Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying:

"My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where
he is and shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let
us then show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield
you from his arrows. Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him
from the pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town,
and raise such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting."

As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides,
and with a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly
shot an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed
itself in his liver. He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over
his table. The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as
he smote the earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and
he kicked the stool with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.

Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try
and get him away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him,
and struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders
and went right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground
and struck the earth with his forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away
from him, leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that
if he stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans might come up
and hack at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off at
a run, and immediately was at his father's side. Then he said:

"Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet
for your temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other
armour for the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed."

"Run and fetch them," answered Ulysses, "while my arrows hold out,
or when I am alone they may get me away from the door." 

Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room
where the armour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and
four brass helmets with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all
speed to his father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and
the swineherd also put on their armour, and took their places near
Ulysses. Meanwhile Ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been
shooting the suitors one by one, and they fell thick on one another:
when his arrows gave out, he set the bow to stand against the end
wall of the house by the door post, and hung a shield four hides thick
about his shoulders; on his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought
with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it, and he
grasped two redoubtable bronze-shod spears. 

Now there was a trap door on the wall, while at one end of the pavement
there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this exit was closed
by a well-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to stand by this door
and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a time. But Agelaus
shouted out, "Cannot some one go up to the trap door and tell the
people what is going on? Help would come at once, and we should soon
make an end of this man and his shooting." 

"This may not be, Agelaus," answered Melanthius, "the mouth of the
narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court.
One brave man could prevent any number from getting in. But I know
what I will do, I will bring you arms from the store room, for I am
sure it is there that Ulysses and his son have put them."

On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store
room of Ulysses, house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many
helmets and spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give
them to the suitors. Ulysses' heart began to fail him when he saw
the suitors putting on their armour and brandishing their spears.
He saw the greatness of the danger, and said to Telemachus, "Some
one of the women inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may
be Melanthius." 

Telemachus answered, "The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I
left the store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out
than I have. Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one
of the women who is doing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius
the son of Dolius." 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the
store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said
to Ulysses who was beside him, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it
is that scoundrel Melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to
the store room. Say, shall I kill him, if I can get the better of
him, or shall I bring him here that you may take your own revenge
for all the many wrongs that he has done in your house?"

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check,
no matter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius' hands
and feet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make the door
fast behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him
close up to the rafters from a high bearing-post, that he may linger
on in an agony." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to
the store room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for
he was busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room,
so the two took their stand on either side of the door and waited.
By and by Melanthius came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old
dry-rotted shield in the other, which had been borne by Laertes when
he was young, but which had been long since thrown aside, and the
straps had become unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him
back by the hair, and threw him struggling to the ground. They bent
his hands and feet well behind his back, and bound them tight with
a painful bond as Ulysses had told them; then they fastened a noose
about his body and strung him up from a high pillar till he was close
up to the rafters, and over him did you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaeus,
saying, "Melanthius, you will pass the night on a soft bed as you
deserve. You will know very well when morning comes from the streams
of Oceanus, and it is time for you to be driving in your goats for
the suitors to feast on." 

There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on
their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take
their places by the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in
the cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were
in the body of the court were still both brave and many. Then Jove's
daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form
of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her and said, "Mentor, lend
me your help, and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns
he has done you. Besides, you are my age-mate." 

But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from
the other side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the
first to reproach her. "Mentor," he cried, "do not let Ulysses beguile
you into siding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what we
will do: when we have killed these people, father and son, we will
kill you too. You shall pay for it with your head, and when we have
killed you, we will take all you have, in doors or out, and bring
it into hotch-pot with Ulysses' property; we will not let your sons
live in your house, nor your daughters, nor shall your widow continue
to live in the city of Ithaca." 

This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very
angrily. "Ulysses," said she, "your strength and prowess are no longer
what they were when you fought for nine long years among the Trojans
about the noble lady Helen. You killed many a man in those days, and
it was through your stratagem that Priam's city was taken. How comes
it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are on your
own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house? Come
on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son of Alcinous
shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred upon him."

But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still
further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she
flew up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat
upon it in the form of a swallow. 

Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,
Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight
upon the suitors' side; of all those who were still fighting for their
lives they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already
fallen under the arrows of Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said,
"My friends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away
after having done nothing for him but brag. They are standing at the
doors unsupported. Do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw
your spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory
by killing him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about the
others." 

They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all
of no effect. One hit the door post; another went against the door;
the pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they
had avoided all the spears of the suitors Ulysses said to his own
men, "My friends, I should say we too had better let drive into the
middle of them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us
by us outright." 

They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.
Ulysses killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus,
while the stockman killed Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as
the others drew back into a corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward
and regained their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.

The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their
weapons for the most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of
the cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft
of another struck the wall. Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of
the top skin from off Telemachus's wrist, and Ctesippus managed to
graze Eumaeus's shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and
fell to the ground. Then Ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd
of suitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and Eumaeus
Polybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, and
taunted him saying, "Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be so
foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your
speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a present
of this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when
he was begging about in his own house." 

Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with
a spear in close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor
in the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that he fell
forward full on his face upon the ground. Then Minerva from her seat
on the rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors
quailed. They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle
maddened by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their
longest. As eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains
swoop down on the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground,
and kill them, for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on
enjoy the sport- even so did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors
and smite them on every side. They made a horrible groaning as their
brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.

Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, "Ulysses I beseech
you have mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the women
in your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others.
I saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for
their folly. I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall
die without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got
no thanks for all the good that I did." 

Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, "If you were their sacrificing
priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be long before
I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have children
by her. Therefore you shall die." 

With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when
he was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then he
struck Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling
in the dust while he was yet speaking. 

The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes- he who had been forced by the
suitors to sing to them- now tried to save his life. He was standing
near towards the trap door, and held his lyre in his hand. He did
not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar
of Jove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes and
Ulysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to
go straight up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he
deemed it best to embrace Ulysses' knees. So he laid his lyre on the
ground the ground between the mixing-bowl and the silver-studded seat;
then going up to Ulysses he caught hold of his knees and said, "Ulysses,
I beseech you have mercy on me and spare me. You will be sorry for
it afterwards if you kill a bard who can sing both for gods and men
as I can. I make all my lays myself, and heaven visits me with every
kind of inspiration. I would sing to you as though you were a god,
do not therefore be in such a hurry to cut my head off. Your own son
Telemachus will tell you that I did not want to frequent your house
and sing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many
and too strong for me, so they made me." 

Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. "Hold!" he
cried, "the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will Medon too,
who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or Eumaeus
has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when you were
raging about the court." 

Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under
a seat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly
flayed heifer's hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus,
and laid hold of his knees. 

"Here I am, my dear sir," said he, "stay your hand therefore, and
tell your father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors
for having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful
to yourself." 

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "Fear not; Telemachus has saved
your life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how
greatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore, outside
the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of the slaughter-
you and the bard- while I finish my work here inside." 

The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat
down by Jove's great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting
that they would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole court carefully
over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was still living,
but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering in their blood.
They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of the sea,
and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the heat of
the sun makes an end of them. Even so were the suitors lying all huddled
up one against the other. 

Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, "Call nurse Euryclea; I have something
to say to her." 

Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women's room. "Make
haste," said he, "you old woman who have been set over all the other
women in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you."

When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women's room
and came out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the corpses
bespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just been devouring
an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so that
he is a fearful sight; even so was Ulysses besmirched from head to
foot with gore. When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity of
blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a great
deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, "Old woman," said he,
"rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise
about it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. Heaven's doom
and their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for
they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who
came near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for
their wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women
in the house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent."

"I will tell you the truth, my son," answered Euryclea. "There are
fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding
wool, and all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all have
misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to Penelope.
They showed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has only lately grown
and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the female servants;
but let me go upstairs and tell your wife all that has happened, for
some god has been sending her to sleep." 

"Do not wake her yet," answered Ulysses, "but tell the women who have
misconducted themselves to come to me." 

Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to
Ulysses; in the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the
swineherd. "Begin," said he, "to remove the dead, and make the women
help you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables
and seats. When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters,
take the women into the space between the domed room and the wall
of the outer court, and run them through with your swords till they
are quite dead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in which
they used to lie in secret with the suitors." 

On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly.
First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against
one another in the gatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made
them do their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. When
they had done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges
and water, while Telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood
and dirt from the ground, and the women carried it all away and put
it out of doors. Then when they had made the whole place quite clean
and orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow
space between the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so
that they could not get away: and Telemachus said to the other two,
"I shall not let these women die a clean death, for they were insolent
to me and my mother, and used to sleep with the suitors."

So saying he made a ship's cable fast to one of the bearing-posts
that supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around
the building, at a good height, lest any of the women's feet should
touch the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that
has been set for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their
nest, and a terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have
to put their heads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably.
Their feet moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long.

As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner
court. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his
vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they
cut off his hands and his feet. 

When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went
back into the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the
dear old nurse Euryclea, "Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution,
and fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters.
Go, moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants,
and also all the maid servants that are in the house." 

"All that you have said is true," answered Euryclea, "but let me bring
you some clean clothes- a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags
on your back any longer. It is not right." 

"First light me a fire," replied Ulysses. 
She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses
thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;
whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands,
and pressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders
and taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like
to weep, for he remembered every one of them. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXIII

Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her
dear husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and
her feet were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent
over her head to speak to her. "Wake up Penelope, my dear child,"
she exclaimed, "and see with your own eyes something that you have
been wanting this long time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come
home again, and has killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble
in his house, eating up his estate and ill-treating his son."

"My good nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be mad. The gods sometimes
send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish
people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to
you; for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you
thus mock me when I have trouble enough already- talking such nonsense,
and waking me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of
my eyes and closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day
my poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back
again into the women's room; if it had been any one else, who had
woke me up to bring me such absurd news I should have sent her away
with a severe scolding. As it is, your age shall protect you."

"My dear child," answered Euryclea, "I am not mocking you. It is quite
true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger
whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus
knew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father's secret
that he might have his revenge on all these wicked people.

Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea,
and wept for joy. "But my dear nurse," said she, "explain this to
me; if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome
the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there
always were?" 

"I was not there," answered Euryclea, "and do not know; I only heard
them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and huddled
up in a corner of the women's room with the doors closed, till your
son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulysses
standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round
him, one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could
have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and filth,
and looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piled up
in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a
great fire to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call
you, so come with me that you may both be happy together after all;
for now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your
husband is come home to find both wife and son alive and well, and
to take his revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so
badly to him." 

"'My dear nurse," said Penelope, "do not exult too confidently over
all this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses
come home- more particularly myself, and the son who has been born
to both of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some
god who is angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and
has made an end of them; for they respected no man in the whole world,
neither rich nor poor, who came near them, who came near them, and
they have come to a bad end in consequence of their iniquity. Ulysses
is dead far away from the Achaean land; he will never return home
again." 

Then nurse Euryclea said, "My child, what are you talking about? but
you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband
is never coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side
at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I
was washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him,
and I wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not
let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I
will make this bargain with you- if I am deceiving you, you may have
me killed by the most cruel death you can think of." 

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "however wise you may be you can hardly
fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search
of my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man
who has killed them." 

On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband
and question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister,
she sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right
angles [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near
one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to
see what his wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long time
she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked
him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his
shabby clothes and failed to recognize him, till Telemachus began
to reproach her and said: 

"Mother- but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name-
why do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit
by his side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No
other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come
back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through
so much; but your heart always was as hard as a stone." 

Penelope answered, "My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can
find no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them.
I cannot even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really is
Ulysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand
one another better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two
are alone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others."

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, "Let your mother put
me to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else,
because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed
another, even though he was not one who would leave many friends to
take up his quarrel, the man who has killed him must still say good
bye to his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing
the stay of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would
have you consider this matter." 

"Look to it yourself, father," answered Telemachus, "for they say
you are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other
mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right
good will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength
holds out." 

"I will say what I think will be best," answered Ulysses. "First wash
and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room
and dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre,
so that if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some
one going along the street happens to notice it, they may think there
is a wedding in the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors
will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon
my own land. Once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven
vouchsafes us shall seem wisest." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed
and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took
his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance.
The house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the
people outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting married
at last. She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to
protect her husband's property until he comes home." 

This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had
been happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses
in his own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made
him look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow
thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth
blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a
skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva-
and his work is full of beauty- enriches a piece of silver plate by
gilding it. He came from the bath looking like one of the immortals,
and sat down opposite his wife on the seat he had left. "My dear,"
said he, "heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than
woman ever yet had. No other woman could bear to keep away from her
husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence,
and after having gone through so much. But come, nurse, get a bed
ready for me; I will sleep alone, for this woman has a heart as hard
as iron." 

"My dear," answered Penelope, "I have no wish to set myself up, nor
to depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very
well remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that
he himself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding
upon it with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets." 

She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, "Wife,
I am much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been
taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found
it a hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some
god came and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however
strong and in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it
is a marvellous curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There
was a young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full
vigour, and about as thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round
this with strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made
the doors strong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of
the olive tree and left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly
from the root upwards and then worked with carpenter's tools well
and skilfully, straightening my work by drawing a line on the wood,
and making it into a bed-prop. I then bored a hole down the middle,
and made it the centre-post of my bed, at which I worked till I had
finished it, inlaying it with gold and silver; after this I stretched
a hide of crimson leather from one side of it to the other. So you
see I know all about it, and I desire to learn whether it is still
there, or whether any one has been removing it by cutting down the
olive tree at its roots." 

When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
down. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck,
and kissed him. "Do not be angry with me Ulysses," she cried, "you,
who are the wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven
has denied us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing
old, together; do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did
not embrace you thus as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering
all the time through fear that someone might come here and deceive
me with a lying story; for there are many very wicked people going
about. Jove's daughter Helen would never have yielded herself to a
man from a foreign country, if she had known that the sons of Achaeans
would come after her and bring her back. Heaven put it in her heart
to do wrong, and she gave no thought to that sin, which has been the
source of all our sorrows. Now, however, that you have convinced me
by showing that you know all about our bed (which no human being has
ever seen but you and I and a single maid servant, the daughter of
Actor, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who keeps
the doors of our room) hard of belief though I have been I can mistrust
no longer." 

Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and
faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men
who are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their
ship with the fury of his winds and waves- a few alone reach the land,
and these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves
on firm ground and out of danger- even so was her husband welcome
to her as she looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair
arms from about his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging
their sorrow till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined
otherwise, and held night back in the far west, while she would not
suffer Dawn to leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and
Phaethon that bear her onward to break the day upon mankind.

At last, however, Ulysses said, "Wife, we have not yet reached the
end of our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo.
It is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus
the shade of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I
went down into Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions.
But now let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed
boon of sleep." 

"You shall go to bed as soon as you please," replied Penelope, "now
that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your
country. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell
me about the task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about
it later, so it is better that I should be told at once."

"My dear," answered Ulysses, "why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it.
I do not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide,
carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never
heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know
nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He
gave me this certain token which I will not hide from you. He said
that a wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing
shovel that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in
the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after
which I was to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven,
one after the other. As for myself, he said that death should come
to me from the sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when
I was full of years and peace of mind, and my people should bless
me. All this, he said, should surely come to pass." 

And Penelope said, "If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier
time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
misfortune." 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches
and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving
the bed chamber woman Eurynome to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed
by torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went
back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and
made the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep
in the cloisters. 

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so
many sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of
wine. Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much
trouble he had himself given to other people. He told her everything,
and she was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till
he had ended his whole story. 

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached
the fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops
and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably
and furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home,
for to his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how
he went on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed
all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.
Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to
the chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet
Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother
who bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard
the wondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks
and terrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed
in safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how
Jove therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all
his men perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at
last he reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso, who kept
him there in a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in
which case she intended making him immortal so that he should never
grow old, but she could not persuade him to let her do so; and how
after much suffering he had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had
treated him as though he had been a god, and sent him back in a ship
to his own country after having given him gold, bronze, and raiment
in great abundance. This was the last thing about which he told her,
for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased the burden of his
sorrows. 

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that
Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On
this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope,
"Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here,
in lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home
though I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we
have at last come together, take care of the property that is in the
house. As for the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten,
I will take many myself by force from other people, and will compel
the Achaeans to make good the rest till they shall have filled all
my yards. I am now going to the wooded lands out in the country to
see my father who has so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself
I will give these instructions, though you have little need of them.
At sunrise it will at once get abroad that I have been killing the
suitors; go upstairs, therefore, and stay there with your women. See
nobody and ask no questions." 

As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus, Philoetius,
and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also. This they
did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they opened the
gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now daylight,
but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led them quickly
out of the town. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XXIV

Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in
his hand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men's eyes
in sleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the
ghosts and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind
him. As bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when
one of them has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even
so did the ghosts whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow
led them down into the dark abode of death. When they had passed the
waters of Oceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the
sun and the land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel
where dwell the souls and shadows of them that can labour no more.

Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of
Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest
man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself. 

They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost
of Agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered
also the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of
Aeisthus; and the ghost of Achilles spoke first. 

"Son of Atreus," it said, "we used to say that Jove had loved you
better from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain
over many and brave men, when we were all fighting together before
Troy; yet the hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid
upon you all too early. Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the
hey-day of your renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound
over your ashes, and your son would have been heir to your good name,
whereas it has now been your lot to come to a most miserable end."

"Happy son of Peleus," answered the ghost of Agamemnon, "for having
died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and
the Achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay
in the whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now
of your chivalry. We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should
we ever have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us.
Then, when we had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid
you on your bed and cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with
ointments. The Danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about
you. Your mother, when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from
out of the sea, and the sound of a great wailing went forth over the
waters so that the Achaeans quaked for fear. They would have fled
panic-stricken to their ships had not wise old Nestor whose counsel
was ever truest checked them saying, 'Hold, Argives, fly not sons
of the Achaeans, this is his mother coming from the sea with her immortal
nymphs to view the body of her son.' 

"Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of
the old man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed
you in immortal raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their
sweet voices in lament- calling and answering one another; there was
not an Argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and
nights seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on
the eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep
with many an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were burnt
in raiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes,
horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you were burning,
with the tramp as of a great multitude. But when the flames of heaven
had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and
laid them in ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us a
golden vase to hold them- gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself;
in this we mingled your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who
had gone before you, and separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus,
who had been closer to you than any other of your comrades now that
Patroclus was no more. 

"Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point
jutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far
out upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be born
hereafter. Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them
to be contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans. You must have
been present at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men gird
themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some
great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis
offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in
death your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives
evermore among all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when
the days of my fighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction
on my return, by the hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife."

Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with
the ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts
of Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went
up to them at once. The ghost of Agamemnon recognized Amphimedon son
of Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began
to talk to him. 

"Amphimedon," it said, "what has happened to all you fine young men-
all of an age too- that you are come down here under the ground? One
could pick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his
winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies
make an end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or
sheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of their wives and city?
Answer my question, for I have been your guest. Do you not remember
how I came to your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join
us with his ships against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could
resume our voyage, for we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come
with us." 

And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, "Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king
of men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you
fully and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about.
Ulysses had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did
not say point blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters
to an end, for she meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was
the trick she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room
and began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. 'Sweethearts,'
said she, 'Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry
again immediately; wait- for I would not have my skill in needlework
perish unrecorded- till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes,
against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the
women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.' This
is what she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working
upon her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the
stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three
years without our finding it out, but as time wore on and she was
now in her fourth year, in the waning of moons and many days had been
accomplished, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told us,
and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish
it whether she would or no; and when she showed us the robe she had
made, after she had had it washed, its splendour was as that of the
sun or moon. 

"Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where
his swineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning
from a voyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had
hatched their plot for our destruction. Telemachus came first, and
then after him, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in
rags and leaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar.
He came so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older
ones among us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. He endured
both being struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his
own house; but when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he
and Telemachus took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting
the doors behind them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow
and a quantity of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors;
and this was the beginning of our end, for not one of us could string
the bow- nor nearly do so. When it was about to reach the hands of
Ulysses, we all of us shouted out that it should not be given him,
no matter what he might say, but Telemachus insisted on his having
it. When he had got it in his hands he strung it with ease and sent
his arrow through the iron. Then he stood on the floor of the cloister
and poured his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. First
he killed Antinous, and then, aiming straight before him, he let fly
his deadly darts and they fell thick on one another. It was plain
that some one of the gods was helping them, for they fell upon us
with might and main throughout the cloisters, and there was a hideous
sound of groaning as our brains were being battered in, and the ground
seethed with our blood. This, Agamemnon, is how we came by our end,
and our bodies are lying still un-cared for in the house of Ulysses,
for our friends at home do not yet know what has happened, so that
they cannot lay us out and wash the black blood from our wounds, making
moan over us according to the offices due to the departed."

"Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes," replied the ghost of Agamemnon, "you
are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare
excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as
Penelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue
shall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall
be welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope.
How far otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus
who killed her lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men,
for she has brought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones."

Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the
bowels of the earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of
the town and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes,
which he had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here was his house, with
a lean-to running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him
slept and sat and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel
woman, who looked after him in this his country-farm. When Ulysses
got there, he said to his son and to the other two: 

"Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to
recognize me after so long an absence." 

He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius,
who went straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard
to make trial of his father. As he went down into the great orchard,
he did not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen,
for they were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard,
at the place where the old man had told them; he therefore found his
father alone, hoeing a vine. He had on a dirty old shirt, patched
and very shabby; his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to
save him from the brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he
had a goat skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone.
When Ulysses saw him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood
still under a tall pear tree and began to weep. He doubted whether
to embrace him, kiss him, and tell him all about his having come home,
or whether he should first question him and see what he would say.
In the end he deemed it best to be crafty with him, so in this mind
he went up to his father, who was bending down and digging about a
plant. 

"I see, sir," said Ulysses, "that you are an excellent gardener- what
pains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not
a fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace
of your attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended
if I say that you take better care of your garden than of yourself.
You are old, unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because
you are idle that your master takes such poor care of you, indeed
your face and figure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim
you of noble birth. I should have said that you were one of those
who should wash well, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have
a right to do; but tell me, and tell me true, whose bondman are you,
and in whose garden are you working? Tell me also about another matter.
Is this place that I have come to really Ithaca? I met a man just
now who said so, but he was a dull fellow, and had not the patience
to hear my story out when I was asking him about an old friend of
mine, whether he was still living, or was already dead and in the
house of Hades. Believe me when I tell you that this man came to my
house once when I was in my own country and never yet did any stranger
come to me whom I liked better. He said that his family came from
Ithaca and that his father was Laertes, son of Arceisius. I received
him hospitably, making him welcome to all the abundance of my house,
and when he went away I gave him all customary presents. I gave him
seven talents of fine gold, and a cup of solid silver with flowers
chased upon it. I gave him twelve light cloaks, and as many pieces
of tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve
rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. To all this
I added four good looking women skilled in all useful arts, and I
let him take his choice." 

His father shed tears and answered, "Sir, you have indeed come to
the country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of
wicked people. All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose.
If you could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would
have entertained you hospitably and would have required your presents
amply when you left him- as would have been only right considering
what you have already given him. But tell me, and tell me true, how
many years is it since you entertained this guest- my unhappy son,
as ever was? Alas! He has perished far from his own country; the fishes
of the sea have eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and
wild beasts of some continent. Neither his mother, nor I his father,
who were his parents, could throw our arms about him and wrap him
in his shroud, nor could his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope
bewail her husband as was natural upon his death bed, and close his
eyes according to the offices due to the departed. But now, tell me
truly for I want to know. Who and whence are you- tell me of your
town and parents? Where is the ship lying that has brought you and
your men to Ithaca? Or were you a passenger on some other man's ship,
and those who brought you here have gone on their way and left you?"

"I will tell you everything," answered Ulysses, "quite truly. I come
from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas,
who is the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove
me off my course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried
here against my will. As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off
the open country outside the town, and this is the fifth year since
Ulysses left my country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for
him when he left me. The birds all flew on our right hands, and both
he and I rejoiced to see them as we parted, for we had every hope
that we should have another friendly meeting and exchange presents."

A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled
both hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his
grey head, groaning heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was
touched, and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then
he sprang towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying,
"I am he, father, about whom you are asking- I have returned after
having been away for twenty years. But cease your sighing and lamentation-
we have no time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing
the suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes."

"If you really are my son Ulysses," replied Laertes, "and have come
back again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity
as shall convince me." 

"First observe this scar," answered Ulysses, "which I got from a boar's
tusk when I was hunting on Mount Parnassus. You and my mother had
sent me to Autolycus, my mother's father, to receive the presents
which when he was over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore
I will point out to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me,
and I asked you all about them as I followed you round the garden.
We went over them all, and you told me their names and what they all
were. You gave me thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty
fig trees; you also said you would give me fifty rows of vines; there
was corn planted between each row, and they yield grapes of every
kind when the heat of heaven has been laid heavy upon them."

Laertes' strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which
his son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had
to support him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon
as he came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, "O
father Jove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the
suitors have really been punished for their insolence and folly. Nevertheless,
I am much afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up
here directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout
the cities of the Cephallenians." 

Ulysses answered, "Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,
but let us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told
Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner
ready as soon as possible." 

Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they
got there they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd
cutting up meat and mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman
took Laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. She
put him on a good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a
more imposing presence, making him taller and stouter than before.
When he came back his son was surprised to see him looking so like
an immortal, and said to him, "My dear father, some one of the gods
has been making you much taller and better-looking." 

Laertes answered, "Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that
I were the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took
Nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what
I then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on,
I should have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors.
I should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoiced
to see it." 

Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their
work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his
proper place on the benches and seats. Then they began eating; by
and by old Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their
mother, the Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he was growing
old, had been to fetch them. When they saw Ulysses and were certain
it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulysses scolded
them good-naturedly and said, "Sit down to your dinner, old man, and
never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin for
some time and have been waiting for you." 

Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. "Sir,"
said he, seizing his master's hand and kissing it at the wrist, "we
have long been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to
us after we had given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the
gods prosper you. But tell me, does Penelope already know of your
return, or shall we send some one to tell her?" 

"Old man," answered Ulysses, "she knows already, so you need not trouble
about that." On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius gathered
round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after the other;
then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their father.

While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went
round the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen
the suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered
from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses.
They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies
of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for
the fishermen to take each of them to his own place. They then met
angrily in the place of assembly, and when they were got together
Eupeithes rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death
of his son Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses,
so he said, weeping bitterly, "My friend, this man has done the Achaeans
great wrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet,
and he has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he
has been killing all the foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let
us be up and doing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where
the Epeans rule, or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards.
It will be an everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder
of our sons and brothers. For my own part I should have no mote pleasure
in life, but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then, and after
them, before they can cross over to the mainland." 

He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard
Phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses.
Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle
of the assembly, and Medon said, "Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses
did not do these things against the will of heaven. I myself saw an
immortal god take the form of Mentor and stand beside him. This god
appeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously
about the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick
on one another." 

On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor,
rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past
and future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying,

"Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out
as they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when
we bade you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong
in the wantonness of their hearts- wasting the substance and dishonouring
the wife of a chieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however,
let it be as I say, and do as I tell you. Do not go out against Ulysses,
or you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your own heads."

This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and
at once left the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for
the speech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes;
they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed
themselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes
led them on in their folly. He thought he was going to avenge the
murder of his son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was
himself to perish in his attempt. 

Then Minerva said to Jove, "Father, son of Saturn, king of kings,
answer me this question- What do you propose to do? Will you set them
fighting still further, or will you make peace between them?"

And Jove answered, "My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by
your own arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon
the suitors? Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think
will be most reasonable arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged,
let them swear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue
to rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre
of their sons and brothers. Let them then all become friends as heretofore,
and let peace and plenty reign." 

This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she
darted from off the topmost summits of Olympus. 

Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by
saying, "Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close
up to us." So one of Dolius's sons went as he was bid. Standing on
the threshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses,
"Here they are, let us put on our armour at once." 

They put on their armour as fast as they could- that is to say Ulysses,
his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius
did the same- warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When
they had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied
forth, Ulysses leading the way. 

Then Jove's daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form
and voice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to
his son Telemachus, "Telemachus, now that are about to fight in an
engagement, which will show every man's mettle, be sure not to disgrace
your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all
the world over." 

"You say truly, my dear father," answered Telemachus, "and you shall
see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family."

Laertes was delighted when he heard this. "Good heavens, he exclaimed,
"what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son and grandson
are vying with one another in the matter of valour." 

On this Minerva came close up to him and said, "Son of Arceisius-
best friend I have in the world- pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and
to Jove her father; then poise your spear and hurl it." 

As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed
to her he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes' helmet,
and the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not,
and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Meantime Ulysses and his son fell the front line of the foe and smote
them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed
every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,
only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. "Men
of Ithaca," she cried, cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter
at once without further bloodshed." 

On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their
arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound
of the goddess's voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives.
But Ulysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped
down like a soaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt
of fire that fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses,
"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will
be angry with you." 

Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed
the form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace
between the two contending parties. 

THE END

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright statement:
The Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
World Wide Web presentation is copyright (C) 1994-2000, Daniel
C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
All rights reserved under international and pan-American copyright
conventions, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part
in any form. Direct permission requests to classics@classics.mit.edu.
Translation of "The Deeds of the Divine Augustus" by Augustus is
copyright (C) Thomas Bushnell, BSG.

Provided by The Internet Classics Archive.
See bottom for copyright. Available online at
    http://classics.mit.edu//Virgil/aeneid.html

The Aeneid
By Virgil


Translated by John Dryden

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK I

Arms, and the man I sing, who, forc'd by fate, 
And haughty Juno's unrelenting hate, 
Expell'd and exil'd, left the Trojan shore. 
Long labors, both by sea and land, he bore, 
And in the doubtful war, before he won 
The Latian realm, and built the destin'd town; 
His banish'd gods restor'd to rites divine, 
And settled sure succession in his line, 
From whence the race of Alban fathers come, 
And the long glories of majestic Rome. 
O Muse! the causes and the crimes relate; 
What goddess was provok'd, and whence her hate; 
For what offense the Queen of Heav'n began 
To persecute so brave, so just a man; 
Involv'd his anxious life in endless cares, 
Expos'd to wants, and hurried into wars! 
Can heav'nly minds such high resentment show, 
Or exercise their spite in human woe? 
Against the Tiber's mouth, but far away, 
An ancient town was seated on the sea; 
A Tyrian colony; the people made 
Stout for the war, and studious of their trade: 
Carthage the name; belov'd by Juno more 
Than her own Argos, or the Samian shore. 
Here stood her chariot; here, if Heav'n were kind, 
The seat of awful empire she design'd. 
Yet she had heard an ancient rumor fly, 
(Long cited by the people of the sky,) 
That times to come should see the Trojan race 
Her Carthage ruin, and her tow'rs deface; 
Nor thus confin'd, the yoke of sov'reign sway 
Should on the necks of all the nations lay. 
She ponder'd this, and fear'd it was in fate; 
Nor could forget the war she wag'd of late 
For conqu'ring Greece against the Trojan state. 
Besides, long causes working in her mind, 
And secret seeds of envy, lay behind; 
Deep graven in her heart the doom remain'd 
Of partial Paris, and her form disdain'd; 
The grace bestow'd on ravish'd Ganymed, 
Electra's glories, and her injur'd bed. 
Each was a cause alone; and all combin'd 
To kindle vengeance in her haughty mind. 
For this, far distant from the Latian coast 
She drove the remnants of the Trojan host; 
And sev'n long years th' unhappy wand'ring train 
Were toss'd by storms, and scatter'd thro' the main. 
Such time, such toil, requir'd the Roman name, 
Such length of labor for so vast a frame. 
Now scarce the Trojan fleet, with sails and oars, 
Had left behind the fair Sicilian shores, 
Ent'ring with cheerful shouts the wat'ry reign, 
And plowing frothy furrows in the main; 
When, lab'ring still with endless discontent, 
The Queen of Heav'n did thus her fury vent: 
"Then am I vanquish'd? must I yield?" said she, 
"And must the Trojans reign in Italy? 
So Fate will have it, and Jove adds his force; 
Nor can my pow'r divert their happy course. 
Could angry Pallas, with revengeful spleen, 
The Grecian navy burn, and drown the men? 
She, for the fault of one offending foe, 
The bolts of Jove himself presum'd to throw: 
With whirlwinds from beneath she toss'd the ship, 
And bare expos'd the bosom of the deep; 
Then, as an eagle gripes the trembling game, 
The wretch, yet hissing with her father's flame, 
She strongly seiz'd, and with a burning wound 
Transfix'd, and naked, on a rock she bound. 
But I, who walk in awful state above, 
The majesty of heav'n, the sister wife of Jove, 
For length of years my fruitless force employ 
Against the thin remains of ruin'd Troy! 
What nations now to Juno's pow'r will pray, 
Or off'rings on my slighted altars lay?" 
Thus rag'd the goddess; and, with fury fraught. 
The restless regions of the storms she sought, 
Where, in a spacious cave of living stone, 
The tyrant Aeolus, from his airy throne, 
With pow'r imperial curbs the struggling winds, 
And sounding tempests in dark prisons binds. 
This way and that th' impatient captives tend, 
And, pressing for release, the mountains rend. 
High in his hall th' undaunted monarch stands, 
And shakes his scepter, and their rage commands; 
Which did he not, their unresisted sway 
Would sweep the world before them in their way; 
Earth, air, and seas thro' empty space would roll, 
And heav'n would fly before the driving soul. 
In fear of this, the Father of the Gods 
Confin'd their fury to those dark abodes, 
And lock'd 'em safe within, oppress'd with mountain loads;

Impos'd a king, with arbitrary sway, 
To loose their fetters, or their force allay. 
To whom the suppliant queen her pray'rs address'd, 
And thus the tenor of her suit express'd: 
"O Aeolus! for to thee the King of Heav'n 
The pow'r of tempests and of winds has giv'n; 
Thy force alone their fury can restrain, 
And smooth the waves, or swell the troubled main- 
A race of wand'ring slaves, abhorr'd by me, 
With prosp'rous passage cut the Tuscan sea; 
To fruitful Italy their course they steer, 
And for their vanquish'd gods design new temples there. 
Raise all thy winds; with night involve the skies; 
Sink or disperse my fatal enemies. 
Twice sev'n, the charming daughters of the main, 
Around my person wait, and bear my train: 
Succeed my wish, and second my design; 
The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine, 
And make thee father of a happy line." 
To this the god: "'T is yours, O queen, to will 
The work which duty binds me to fulfil. 
These airy kingdoms, and this wide command, 
Are all the presents of your bounteous hand: 
Yours is my sov'reign's grace; and, as your guest, 
I sit with gods at their celestial feast; 
Raise tempests at your pleasure, or subdue; 
Dispose of empire, which I hold from you." 
He said, and hurl'd against the mountain side 
His quiv'ring spear, and all the god applied. 
The raging winds rush thro' the hollow wound, 
And dance aloft in air, and skim along the ground; 
Then, settling on the sea, the surges sweep, 
Raise liquid mountains, and disclose the deep. 
South, East, and West with mix'd confusion roar, 
And roll the foaming billows to the shore. 
The cables crack; the sailors' fearful cries 
Ascend; and sable night involves the skies; 
And heav'n itself is ravish'd from their eyes. 
Loud peals of thunder from the poles ensue; 
Then flashing fires the transient light renew; 
The face of things a frightful image bears, 
And present death in various forms appears. 
Struck with unusual fright, the Trojan chief, 
With lifted hands and eyes, invokes relief; 
And, "Thrice and four times happy those," he cried, 
"That under Ilian walls before their parents died! 
Tydides, bravest of the Grecian train! 
Why could not I by that strong arm be slain, 
And lie by noble Hector on the plain, 
Or great Sarpedon, in those bloody fields 
Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields 
Of heroes, whose dismember'd hands yet bear 
The dart aloft, and clench the pointed spear!" 
Thus while the pious prince his fate bewails, 
Fierce Boreas drove against his flying sails, 
And rent the sheets; the raging billows rise, 
And mount the tossing vessels to the skies: 
Nor can the shiv'ring oars sustain the blow; 
The galley gives her side, and turns her prow; 
While those astern, descending down the steep, 
Thro' gaping waves behold the boiling deep. 
Three ships were hurried by the southern blast, 
And on the secret shelves with fury cast. 
Those hidden rocks th' Ausonian sailors knew: 
They call'd them Altars, when they rose in view, 
And show'd their spacious backs above the flood. 
Three more fierce Eurus, in his angry mood, 
Dash'd on the shallows of the moving sand, 
And in mid ocean left them moor'd aland. 
Orontes' bark, that bore the Lycian crew, 
(A horrid sight!) ev'n in the hero's view, 
From stem to stern by waves was overborne: 
The trembling pilot, from his rudder torn, 
Was headlong hurl'd; thrice round the ship was toss'd, 
Then bulg'd at once, and in the deep was lost; 
And here and there above the waves were seen 
Arms, pictures, precious goods, and floating men. 
The stoutest vessel to the storm gave way, 
And suck'd thro' loosen'd planks the rushing sea. 
Ilioneus was her chief: Alethes old, 
Achates faithful, Abas young and bold, 
Endur'd not less; their ships, with gaping seams, 
Admit the deluge of the briny streams. 
Meantime imperial Neptune heard the sound 
Of raging billows breaking on the ground. 
Displeas'd, and fearing for his wat'ry reign, 
He rear'd his awful head above the main, 
Serene in majesty; then roll'd his eyes 
Around the space of earth, and seas, and skies. 
He saw the Trojan fleet dispers'd, distress'd, 
By stormy winds and wintry heav'n oppress'd. 
Full well the god his sister's envy knew, 
And what her aims and what her arts pursue. 
He summon'd Eurus and the western blast, 
And first an angry glance on both he cast; 
Then thus rebuk'd: "Audacious winds! from whence 
This bold attempt, this rebel insolence? 
Is it for you to ravage seas and land, 
Unauthoriz'd by my supreme command? 
To raise such mountains on the troubled main? 
Whom I- but first 't is fit the billows to restrain; 
And then you shall be taught obedience to my reign. 
Hence! to your lord my royal mandate bear- 
The realms of ocean and the fields of air 
Are mine, not his. By fatal lot to me 
The liquid empire fell, and trident of the sea. 
His pow'r to hollow caverns is confin'd: 
There let him reign, the jailer of the wind, 
With hoarse commands his breathing subjects call, 
And boast and bluster in his empty hall." 
He spoke; and, while he spoke, he smooth'd the sea, 
Dispell'd the darkness, and restor'd the day. 
Cymothoe, Triton, and the sea-green train 
Of beauteous nymphs, the daughters of the main, 
Clear from the rocks the vessels with their hands: 
The god himself with ready trident stands, 
And opes the deep, and spreads the moving sands; 
Then heaves them off the shoals. Where'er he guides 
His finny coursers and in triumph rides, 
The waves unruffle and the sea subsides. 
As, when in tumults rise th' ignoble crowd, 
Mad are their motions, and their tongues are loud; 
And stones and brands in rattling volleys fly, 
And all the rustic arms that fury can supply: 
If then some grave and pious man appear, 
They hush their noise, and lend a list'ning ear; 
He soothes with sober words their angry mood, 
And quenches their innate desire of blood: 
So, when the Father of the Flood appears, 
And o'er the seas his sov'reign trident rears, 
Their fury falls: he skims the liquid plains, 
High on his chariot, and, with loosen'd reins, 
Majestic moves along, and awful peace maintains. 
The weary Trojans ply their shatter'd oars 
To nearest land, and make the Libyan shores. 
Within a long recess there lies a bay: 
An island shades it from the rolling sea, 
And forms a port secure for ships to ride; 
Broke by the jutting land, on either side, 
In double streams the briny waters glide. 
Betwixt two rows of rocks a sylvan scene 
Appears above, and groves for ever green: 
A grot is form'd beneath, with mossy seats, 
To rest the Nereids, and exclude the heats. 
Down thro' the crannies of the living walls 
The crystal streams descend in murm'ring falls: 
No haulsers need to bind the vessels here, 
Nor bearded anchors; for no storms they fear. 
Sev'n ships within this happy harbor meet, 
The thin remainders of the scatter'd fleet. 
The Trojans, worn with toils, and spent with woes, 
Leap on the welcome land, and seek their wish'd repose. 
First, good Achates, with repeated strokes 
Of clashing flints, their hidden fire provokes: 
Short flame succeeds; a bed of wither'd leaves 
The dying sparkles in their fall receives: 
Caught into life, in fiery fumes they rise, 
And, fed with stronger food, invade the skies. 
The Trojans, dropping wet, or stand around 
The cheerful blaze, or lie along the ground: 
Some dry their corn, infected with the brine, 
Then grind with marbles, and prepare to dine. 
Aeneas climbs the mountain's airy brow, 
And takes a prospect of the seas below, 
If Capys thence, or Antheus he could spy, 
Or see the streamers of Caicus fly. 
No vessels were in view; but, on the plain, 
Three beamy stags command a lordly train 
Of branching heads: the more ignoble throng 
Attend their stately steps, and slowly graze along. 
He stood; and, while secure they fed below, 
He took the quiver and the trusty bow 
Achates us'd to bear: the leaders first 
He laid along, and then the vulgar pierc'd; 
Nor ceas'd his arrows, till the shady plain 
Sev'n mighty bodies with their blood distain. 
For the sev'n ships he made an equal share, 
And to the port return'd, triumphant from the war. 
The jars of gen'rous wine (Acestes' gift, 
When his Trinacrian shores the navy left) 
He set abroach, and for the feast prepar'd, 
In equal portions with the ven'son shar'd. 
Thus while he dealt it round, the pious chief 
With cheerful words allay'd the common grief: 
"Endure, and conquer! Jove will soon dispose 
To future good our past and present woes. 
With me, the rocks of Scylla you have tried; 
Th' inhuman Cyclops and his den defied. 
What greater ills hereafter can you bear? 
Resume your courage and dismiss your care, 
An hour will come, with pleasure to relate 
Your sorrows past, as benefits of Fate. 
Thro' various hazards and events, we move 
To Latium and the realms foredoom'd by Jove. 
Call'd to the seat (the promise of the skies) 
Where Trojan kingdoms once again may rise, 
Endure the hardships of your present state; 
Live, and reserve yourselves for better fate." 
These words he spoke, but spoke not from his heart; 
His outward smiles conceal'd his inward smart. 
The jolly crew, unmindful of the past, 
The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste. 
Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil; 
The limbs, yet trembling, in the caldrons boil; 
Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil. 
Stretch'd on the grassy turf, at ease they dine, 
Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with wine.

Their hunger thus appeas'd, their care attends 
The doubtful fortune of their absent friends: 
Alternate hopes and fears their minds possess, 
Whether to deem 'em dead, or in distress. 
Above the rest, Aeneas mourns the fate 
Of brave Orontes, and th' uncertain state 
Of Gyas, Lycus, and of Amycus. 
The day, but not their sorrows, ended thus. 
When, from aloft, almighty Jove surveys 
Earth, air, and shores, and navigable seas, 
At length on Libyan realms he fix'd his eyes- 
Whom, pond'ring thus on human miseries, 
When Venus saw, she with a lowly look, 
Not free from tears, her heav'nly sire bespoke: 
"O King of Gods and Men! whose awful hand 
Disperses thunder on the seas and land, 
Disposing all with absolute command; 
How could my pious son thy pow'r incense? 
Or what, alas! is vanish'd Troy's offense? 
Our hope of Italy not only lost, 
On various seas by various tempests toss'd, 
But shut from ev'ry shore, and barr'd from ev'ry coast. 
You promis'd once, a progeny divine 
Of Romans, rising from the Trojan line, 
In after times should hold the world in awe, 
And to the land and ocean give the law. 
How is your doom revers'd, which eas'd my care 
When Troy was ruin'd in that cruel war? 
Then fates to fates I could oppose; but now, 
When Fortune still pursues her former blow, 
What can I hope? What worse can still succeed? 
What end of labors has your will decreed? 
Antenor, from the midst of Grecian hosts, 
Could pass secure, and pierce th' Illyrian coasts, 
Where, rolling down the steep, Timavus raves 
And thro' nine channels disembogues his waves. 
At length he founded Padua's happy seat, 
And gave his Trojans a secure retreat; 
There fix'd their arms, and there renew'd their name, 
And there in quiet rules, and crown'd with fame. 
But we, descended from your sacred line, 
Entitled to your heav'n and rites divine, 
Are banish'd earth; and, for the wrath of one, 
Remov'd from Latium and the promis'd throne. 
Are these our scepters? these our due rewards? 
And is it thus that Jove his plighted faith regards?" 
To whom the Father of th' immortal race, 
Smiling with that serene indulgent face, 
With which he drives the clouds and clears the skies, 
First gave a holy kiss; then thus replies: 
"Daughter, dismiss thy fears; to thy desire 
The fates of thine are fix'd, and stand entire. 
Thou shalt behold thy wish'd Lavinian walls; 
And, ripe for heav'n, when fate Aeneas calls, 
Then shalt thou bear him up, sublime, to me: 
No councils have revers'd my firm decree. 
And, lest new fears disturb thy happy state, 
Know, I have search'd the mystic rolls of Fate: 
Thy son (nor is th' appointed season far) 
In Italy shall wage successful war, 
Shall tame fierce nations in the bloody field, 
And sov'reign laws impose, and cities build, 
Till, after ev'ry foe subdued, the sun 
Thrice thro' the signs his annual race shall run: 
This is his time prefix'd. Ascanius then, 
Now call'd Iulus, shall begin his reign. 
He thirty rolling years the crown shall wear, 
Then from Lavinium shall the seat transfer, 
And, with hard labor, Alba Longa build. 
The throne with his succession shall be fill'd 
Three hundred circuits more: then shall be seen 
Ilia the fair, a priestess and a queen, 
Who, full of Mars, in time, with kindly throes, 
Shall at a birth two goodly boys disclose. 
The royal babes a tawny wolf shall drain: 
Then Romulus his grandsire's throne shall gain, 
Of martial tow'rs the founder shall become, 
The people Romans call, the city Rome. 
To them no bounds of empire I assign, 
Nor term of years to their immortal line. 
Ev'n haughty Juno, who, with endless broils, 
Earth, seas, and heav'n, and Jove himself turmoils; 
At length aton'd, her friendly pow'r shall join, 
To cherish and advance the Trojan line. 
The subject world shall Rome's dominion own, 
And, prostrate, shall adore the nation of the gown. 
An age is ripening in revolving fate 
When Troy shall overturn the Grecian state, 
And sweet revenge her conqu'ring sons shall call, 
To crush the people that conspir'd her fall. 
Then Caesar from the Julian stock shall rise, 
Whose empire ocean, and whose fame the skies 
Alone shall bound; whom, fraught with eastern spoils, 
Our heav'n, the just reward of human toils, 
Securely shall repay with rites divine; 
And incense shall ascend before his sacred shrine. 
Then dire debate and impious war shall cease, 
And the stern age be soften'd into peace: 
Then banish'd Faith shall once again return, 
And Vestal fires in hallow'd temples burn; 
And Remus with Quirinus shall sustain 
The righteous laws, and fraud and force restrain. 
Janus himself before his fane shall wait, 
And keep the dreadful issues of his gate, 
With bolts and iron bars: within remains 
Imprison'd Fury, bound in brazen chains; 
High on a trophy rais'd, of useless arms, 
He sits, and threats the world with vain alarms." 
He said, and sent Cyllenius with command 
To free the ports, and ope the Punic land 
To Trojan guests; lest, ignorant of fate, 
The queen might force them from her town and state. 
Down from the steep of heav'n Cyllenius flies, 
And cleaves with all his wings the yielding skies. 
Soon on the Libyan shore descends the god, 
Performs his message, and displays his rod: 
The surly murmurs of the people cease; 
And, as the fates requir'd, they give the peace: 
The queen herself suspends the rigid laws, 
The Trojans pities, and protects their cause. 
Meantime, in shades of night Aeneas lies: 
Care seiz'd his soul, and sleep forsook his eyes. 
But, when the sun restor'd the cheerful day, 
He rose, the coast and country to survey, 
Anxious and eager to discover more. 
It look'd a wild uncultivated shore; 
But, whether humankind, or beasts alone 
Possess'd the new-found region, was unknown. 
Beneath a ledge of rocks his fleet he hides: 
Tall trees surround the mountain's shady sides; 
The bending brow above a safe retreat provides. 
Arm'd with two pointed darts, he leaves his friends, 
And true Achates on his steps attends. 
Lo! in the deep recesses of the wood, 
Before his eyes his goddess mother stood: 
A huntress in her habit and her mien; 
Her dress a maid, her air confess'd a queen. 
Bare were her knees, and knots her garments bind; 
Loose was her hair, and wanton'd in the wind; 
Her hand sustain'd a bow; her quiver hung behind. 
She seem'd a virgin of the Spartan blood: 
With such array Harpalyce bestrode 
Her Thracian courser and outstripp'd the rapid flood. 
"Ho, strangers! have you lately seen," she said, 
"One of my sisters, like myself array'd, 
Who cross'd the lawn, or in the forest stray'd? 
A painted quiver at her back she bore; 
Varied with spots, a lynx's hide she wore; 
And at full cry pursued the tusky boar." 
Thus Venus: thus her son replied again: 
"None of your sisters have we heard or seen, 
O virgin! or what other name you bear 
Above that style- O more than mortal fair! 
Your voice and mien celestial birth betray! 
If, as you seem, the sister of the day, 
Or one at least of chaste Diana's train, 
Let not an humble suppliant sue in vain; 
But tell a stranger, long in tempests toss'd, 
What earth we tread, and who commands the coast? 
Then on your name shall wretched mortals call, 
And offer'd victims at your altars fall." 
"I dare not," she replied, "assume the name 
Of goddess, or celestial honors claim: 
For Tyrian virgins bows and quivers bear, 
And purple buskins o'er their ankles wear. 
Know, gentle youth, in Libyan lands you are- 
A people rude in peace, and rough in war. 
The rising city, which from far you see, 
Is Carthage, and a Tyrian colony. 
Phoenician Dido rules the growing state, 
Who fled from Tyre, to shun her brother's hate. 
Great were her wrongs, her story full of fate; 
Which I will sum in short. Sichaeus, known 
For wealth, and brother to the Punic throne, 
Possess'd fair Dido's bed; and either heart 
At once was wounded with an equal dart. 
Her father gave her, yet a spotless maid; 
Pygmalion then the Tyrian scepter sway'd: 
One who condemn'd divine and human laws. 
Then strife ensued, and cursed gold the cause. 
The monarch, blinded with desire of wealth, 
With steel invades his brother's life by stealth; 
Before the sacred altar made him bleed, 
And long from her conceal'd the cruel deed. 
Some tale, some new pretense, he daily coin'd, 
To soothe his sister, and delude her mind. 
At length, in dead of night, the ghost appears 
Of her unhappy lord: the specter stares, 
And, with erected eyes, his bloody bosom bares. 
The cruel altars and his fate he tells, 
And the dire secret of his house reveals, 
Then warns the widow, with her household gods, 
To seek a refuge in remote abodes. 
Last, to support her in so long a way, 
He shows her where his hidden treasure lay. 
Admonish'd thus, and seiz'd with mortal fright, 
The queen provides companions of her flight: 
They meet, and all combine to leave the state, 
Who hate the tyrant, or who fear his hate. 
They seize a fleet, which ready rigg'd they find; 
Nor is Pygmalion's treasure left behind. 
The vessels, heavy laden, put to sea 
With prosp'rous winds; a woman leads the way. 
I know not, if by stress of weather driv'n, 
Or was their fatal course dispos'd by Heav'n; 
At last they landed, where from far your eyes 
May view the turrets of new Carthage rise; 
There bought a space of ground, which (Byrsa call'd, 
From the bull's hide) they first inclos'd, and wall'd. 
But whence are you? what country claims your birth? 
What seek you, strangers, on our Libyan earth?" 
To whom, with sorrow streaming from his eyes, 
And deeply sighing, thus her son replies: 
"Could you with patience hear, or I relate, 
O nymph, the tedious annals of our fate! 
Thro' such a train of woes if I should run, 
The day would sooner than the tale be done! 
From ancient Troy, by force expell'd, we came- 
If you by chance have heard the Trojan name. 
On various seas by various tempests toss'd, 
At length we landed on your Libyan coast. 
The good Aeneas am I call'd- a name, 
While Fortune favor'd, not unknown to fame. 
My household gods, companions of my woes, 
With pious care I rescued from our foes. 
To fruitful Italy my course was bent; 
And from the King of Heav'n is my descent. 
With twice ten sail I cross'd the Phrygian sea; 
Fate and my mother goddess led my way. 
Scarce sev'n, the thin remainders of my fleet, 
From storms preserv'd, within your harbor meet. 
Myself distress'd, an exile, and unknown, 
Debarr'd from Europe, and from Asia thrown, 
In Libyan desarts wander thus alone." 
His tender parent could no longer bear; 
But, interposing, sought to soothe his care. 
"Whoe'er you are- not unbelov'd by Heav'n, 
Since on our friendly shore your ships are driv'n- 
Have courage: to the gods permit the rest, 
And to the queen expose your just request. 
Now take this earnest of success, for more: 
Your scatter'd fleet is join'd upon the shore; 
The winds are chang'd, your friends from danger free; 
Or I renounce my skill in augury. 
Twelve swans behold in beauteous order move, 
And stoop with closing pinions from above; 
Whom late the bird of Jove had driv'n along, 
And thro' the clouds pursued the scatt'ring throng: 
Now, all united in a goodly team, 
They skim the ground, and seek the quiet stream. 
As they, with joy returning, clap their wings, 
And ride the circuit of the skies in rings; 
Not otherwise your ships, and ev'ry friend, 
Already hold the port, or with swift sails descend. 
No more advice is needful; but pursue 
The path before you, and the town in view." 
Thus having said, she turn'd, and made appear 
Her neck refulgent, and dishevel'd hair, 
Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach'd the ground. 
And widely spread ambrosial scents around: 
In length of train descends her sweeping gown; 
And, by her graceful walk, the Queen of Love is known. 
The prince pursued the parting deity 
With words like these: "Ah! whither do you fly? 
Unkind and cruel! to deceive your son 
In borrow'd shapes, and his embrace to shun; 
Never to bless my sight, but thus unknown; 
And still to speak in accents not your own." 
Against the goddess these complaints he made, 
But took the path, and her commands obey'd. 
They march, obscure; for Venus kindly shrouds 
With mists their persons, and involves in clouds, 
That, thus unseen, their passage none might stay, 
Or force to tell the causes of their way. 
This part perform'd, the goddess flies sublime 
To visit Paphos and her native clime; 
Where garlands, ever green and ever fair, 
With vows are offer'd, and with solemn pray'r: 
A hundred altars in her temple smoke; 
A thousand bleeding hearts her pow'r invoke. 
They climb the next ascent, and, looking down, 
Now at a nearer distance view the town. 
The prince with wonder sees the stately tow'rs, 
Which late were huts and shepherds' homely bow'rs, 
The gates and streets; and hears, from ev'ry part, 
The noise and busy concourse of the mart. 
The toiling Tyrians on each other call 
To ply their labor: some extend the wall; 
Some build the citadel; the brawny throng 
Or dig, or push unwieldly stones along. 
Some for their dwellings choose a spot of ground, 
Which, first design'd, with ditches they surround. 
Some laws ordain; and some attend the choice 
Of holy senates, and elect by voice. 
Here some design a mole, while others there 
Lay deep foundations for a theater; 
From marble quarries mighty columns hew, 
For ornaments of scenes, and future view. 
Such is their toil, and such their busy pains, 
As exercise the bees in flow'ry plains, 
When winter past, and summer scarce begun, 
Invites them forth to labor in the sun; 
Some lead their youth abroad, while some condense 
Their liquid store, and some in cells dispense; 
Some at the gate stand ready to receive 
The golden burthen, and their friends relieve; 
All with united force, combine to drive 
The lazy drones from the laborious hive: 
With envy stung, they view each other's deeds; 
The fragrant work with diligence proceeds. 
"Thrice happy you, whose walls already rise!" 
Aeneas said, and view'd, with lifted eyes, 
Their lofty tow'rs; then, entiring at the gate, 
Conceal'd in clouds (prodigious to relate) 
He mix'd, unmark'd, among the busy throng, 
Borne by the tide, and pass'd unseen along. 
Full in the center of the town there stood, 
Thick set with trees, a venerable wood. 
The Tyrians, landing near this holy ground, 
And digging here, a prosp'rous omen found: 
From under earth a courser's head they drew, 
Their growth and future fortune to foreshew. 
This fated sign their foundress Juno gave, 
Of a soil fruitful, and a people brave. 
Sidonian Dido here with solemn state 
Did Juno's temple build, and consecrate, 
Enrich'd with gifts, and with a golden shrine; 
But more the goddess made the place divine. 
On brazen steps the marble threshold rose, 
And brazen plates the cedar beams inclose: 
The rafters are with brazen cov'rings crown'd; 
The lofty doors on brazen hinges sound. 
What first Aeneas this place beheld, 
Reviv'd his courage, and his fear expell'd. 
For while, expecting there the queen, he rais'd 
His wond'ring eyes, and round the temple gaz'd, 
Admir'd the fortune of the rising town, 
The striving artists, and their arts' renown; 
He saw, in order painted on the wall, 
Whatever did unhappy Troy befall: 
The wars that fame around the world had blown, 
All to the life, and ev'ry leader known. 
There Agamemnon, Priam here, he spies, 
And fierce Achilles, who both kings defies. 
He stopp'd, and weeping said: "O friend! ev'n here 
The monuments of Trojan woes appear! 
Our known disasters fill ev'n foreign lands: 
See there, where old unhappy Priam stands! 
Ev'n the mute walls relate the warrior's fame, 
And Trojan griefs the Tyrians' pity claim." 
He said (his tears a ready passage find), 
Devouring what he saw so well design'd, 
And with an empty picture fed his mind: 
For there he saw the fainting Grecians yield, 
And here the trembling Trojans quit the field, 
Pursued by fierce Achilles thro' the plain, 
On his high chariot driving o'er the slain. 
The tents of Rhesus next his grief renew, 
By their white sails betray'd to nightly view; 
And wakeful Diomede, whose cruel sword 
The sentries slew, nor spar'd their slumb'ring lord, 
Then took the fiery steeds, ere yet the food 
Of Troy they taste, or drink the Xanthian flood. 
Elsewhere he saw where Troilus defied 
Achilles, and unequal combat tried; 
Then, where the boy disarm'd, with loosen'd reins, 
Was by his horses hurried o'er the plains, 
Hung by the neck and hair, and dragg'd around: 
The hostile spear, yet sticking in his wound, 
With tracks of blood inscrib'd the dusty ground. 
Meantime the Trojan dames, oppress'd with woe, 
To Pallas' fane in long procession go, 
In hopes to reconcile their heav'nly foe. 
They weep, they beat their breasts, they rend their hair,

And rich embroider'd vests for presents bear; 
But the stern goddess stands unmov'd with pray'r. 
Thrice round the Trojan walls Achilles drew 
The corpse of Hector, whom in fight he slew. 
Here Priam sues; and there, for sums of gold, 
The lifeless body of his son is sold. 
So sad an object, and so well express'd, 
Drew sighs and groans from the griev'd hero's breast, 
To see the figure of his lifeless friend, 
And his old sire his helpless hand extend. 
Himself he saw amidst the Grecian train, 
Mix'd in the bloody battle on the plain; 
And swarthy Memnon in his arms he knew, 
His pompous ensigns, and his Indian crew. 
Penthisilea there, with haughty grace, 
Leads to the wars an Amazonian race: 
In their right hands a pointed dart they wield; 
The left, for ward, sustains the lunar shield. 
Athwart her breast a golden belt she throws, 
Amidst the press alone provokes a thousand foes, 
And dares her maiden arms to manly force oppose. 
Thus while the Trojan prince employs his eyes, 
Fix'd on the walls with wonder and surprise, 
The beauteous Dido, with a num'rous train 
And pomp of guards, ascends the sacred fane. 
Such on Eurotas' banks, or Cynthus' height, 
Diana seems; and so she charms the sight, 
When in the dance the graceful goddess leads 
The choir of nymphs, and overtops their heads: 
Known by her quiver, and her lofty mien, 
She walks majestic, and she looks their queen; 
Latona sees her shine above the rest, 
And feeds with secret joy her silent breast. 
Such Dido was; with such becoming state, 
Amidst the crowd, she walks serenely great. 
Their labor to her future sway she speeds, 
And passing with a gracious glance proceeds; 
Then mounts the throne, high plac'd before the shrine: 
In crowds around, the swarming people join. 
She takes petitions, and dispenses laws, 
Hears and determines ev'ry private cause; 
Their tasks in equal portions she divides, 
And, where unequal, there by lots decides. 
Another way by chance Aeneas bends 
His eyes, and unexpected sees his friends, 
Antheus, Sergestus grave, Cloanthus strong, 
And at their backs a mighty Trojan throng, 
Whom late the tempest on the billows toss'd, 
And widely scatter'd on another coast. 
The prince, unseen, surpris'd with wonder stands, 
And longs, with joyful haste, to join their hands; 
But, doubtful of the wish'd event, he stays, 
And from the hollow cloud his friends surveys, 
Impatient till they told their present state, 
And where they left their ships, and what their fate, 
And why they came, and what was their request; 
For these were sent, commission'd by the rest, 
To sue for leave to land their sickly men, 
And gain admission to the gracious queen. 
Ent'ring, with cries they fill'd the holy fane; 
Then thus, with lowly voice, Ilioneus began: 
"O queen! indulg'd by favor of the gods 
To found an empire in these new abodes, 
To build a town, with statutes to restrain 
The wild inhabitants beneath thy reign, 
We wretched Trojans, toss'd on ev'ry shore, 
From sea to sea, thy clemency implore. 
Forbid the fires our shipping to deface! 
Receive th' unhappy fugitives to grace, 
And spare the remnant of a pious race! 
We come not with design of wasteful prey, 
To drive the country, force the swains away: 
Nor such our strength, nor such is our desire; 
The vanquish'd dare not to such thoughts aspire. 
A land there is, Hesperia nam'd of old; 
The soil is fruitful, and the men are bold- 
Th' Oenotrians held it once- by common fame 
Now call'd Italia, from the leader's name. 
To that sweet region was our voyage bent, 
When winds and ev'ry warring element 
Disturb'd our course, and, far from sight of land, 
Cast our torn vessels on the moving sand: 
The sea came on; the South, with mighty roar, 
Dispers'd and dash'd the rest upon the rocky shore. 
Those few you see escap'd the Storm, and fear, 
Unless you interpose, a shipwreck here. 
What men, what monsters, what inhuman race, 
What laws, what barb'rous customs of the place, 
Shut up a desart shore to drowning men, 
And drive us to the cruel seas again? 
If our hard fortune no compassion draws, 
Nor hospitable rights, nor human laws, 
The gods are just, and will revenge our cause. 
Aeneas was our prince: a juster lord, 
Or nobler warrior, never drew a sword; 
Observant of the right, religious of his word. 
If yet he lives, and draws this vital air, 
Nor we, his friends, of safety shall despair; 
Nor you, great queen, these offices repent, 
Which he will equal, and perhaps augment. 
We want not cities, nor Sicilian coasts, 
Where King Acestes Trojan lineage boasts. 
Permit our ships a shelter on your shores, 
Refitted from your woods with planks and oars, 
That, if our prince be safe, we may renew 
Our destin'd course, and Italy pursue. 
But if, O best of men, the Fates ordain 
That thou art swallow'd in the Libyan main, 
And if our young Iulus be no more, 
Dismiss our navy from your friendly shore, 
That we to good Acestes may return, 
And with our friends our common losses mourn." 
Thus spoke Ilioneus: the Trojan crew 
With cries and clamors his request renew. 
The modest queen a while, with downcast eyes, 
Ponder'd the speech; then briefly thus replies: 
"Trojans, dismiss your fears; my cruel fate, 
And doubts attending an unsettled state, 
Force me to guard my coast from foreign foes. 
Who has not heard the story of your woes, 
The name and fortune of your native place, 
The fame and valor of the Phrygian race? 
We Tyrians are not so devoid of sense, 
Nor so remote from Phoebus' influence. 
Whether to Latian shores your course is bent, 
Or, driv'n by tempests from your first intent, 
You seek the good Acestes' government, 
Your men shall be receiv'd, your fleet repair'd, 
And sail, with ships of convoy for your guard: 
Or, would you stay, and join your friendly pow'rs 
To raise and to defend the Tyrian tow'rs, 
My wealth, my city, and myself are yours. 
And would to Heav'n, the Storm, you felt, would bring 
On Carthaginian coasts your wand'ring king. 
My people shall, by my command, explore 
The ports and creeks of ev'ry winding shore, 
And towns, and wilds, and shady woods, in quest 
Of so renown'd and so desir'd a guest." 
Rais'd in his mind the Trojan hero stood, 
And long'd to break from out his ambient cloud: 
Achates found it, and thus urg'd his way: 
"From whence, O goddess-born, this long delay? 
What more can you desire, your welcome sure, 
Your fleet in safety, and your friends secure? 
One only wants; and him we saw in vain 
Oppose the Storm, and swallow'd in the main. 
Orontes in his fate our forfeit paid; 
The rest agrees with what your mother said." 
Scarce had he spoken, when the cloud gave way, 
The mists flew upward and dissolv'd in day. 
The Trojan chief appear'd in open sight, 
August in visage, and serenely bright. 
His mother goddess, with her hands divine, 
Had form'd his curling locks, and made his temples shine,

And giv'n his rolling eyes a sparkling grace, 
And breath'd a youthful vigor on his face; 
Like polish'd ivory, beauteous to behold, 
Or Parian marble, when enchas'd in gold: 
Thus radiant from the circling cloud he broke, 
And thus with manly modesty he spoke: 
"He whom you seek am I; by tempests toss'd, 
And sav'd from shipwreck on your Libyan coast; 
Presenting, gracious queen, before your throne, 
A prince that owes his life to you alone. 
Fair majesty, the refuge and redress 
Of those whom fate pursues, and wants oppress, 
You, who your pious offices employ 
To save the relics of abandon'd Troy; 
Receive the shipwreck'd on your friendly shore, 
With hospitable rites relieve the poor; 
Associate in your town a wand'ring train, 
And strangers in your palace entertain: 
What thanks can wretched fugitives return, 
Who, scatter'd thro' the world, in exile mourn? 
The gods, if gods to goodness are inclin'd; 
If acts of mercy touch their heav'nly mind, 
And, more than all the gods, your gen'rous heart. 
Conscious of worth, requite its own desert! 
In you this age is happy, and this earth, 
And parents more than mortal gave you birth. 
While rolling rivers into seas shall run, 
And round the space of heav'n the radiant sun; 
While trees the mountain tops with shades supply, 
Your honor, name, and praise shall never die. 
Whate'er abode my fortune has assign'd, 
Your image shall be present in my mind." 
Thus having said, he turn'd with pious haste, 
And joyful his expecting friends embrac'd: 
With his right hand Ilioneus was grac'd, 
Serestus with his left; then to his breast 
Cloanthus and the noble Gyas press'd; 
And so by turns descended to the rest. 
The Tyrian queen stood fix'd upon his face, 
Pleas'd with his motions, ravish'd with his grace; 
Admir'd his fortunes, more admir'd the man; 
Then recollected stood, and thus began: 
"What fate, O goddess-born; what angry pow'rs 
Have cast you shipwrack'd on our barren shores? 
Are you the great Aeneas, known to fame, 
Who from celestial seed your lineage claim? 
The same Aeneas whom fair Venus bore 
To fam'd Anchises on th' Idaean shore? 
It calls into my mind, tho' then a child, 
When Teucer came, from Salamis exil'd, 
And sought my father's aid, to be restor'd: 
My father Belus then with fire and sword 
Invaded Cyprus, made the region bare, 
And, conqu'ring, finish'd the successful war. 
From him the Trojan siege I understood, 
The Grecian chiefs, and your illustrious blood. 
Your foe himself the Dardan valor prais'd, 
And his own ancestry from Trojans rais'd. 
Enter, my noble guest, and you shall find, 
If not a costly welcome, yet a kind: 
For I myself, like you, have been distress'd, 
Till Heav'n afforded me this place of rest; 
Like you, an alien in a land unknown, 
I learn to pity woes so like my own." 
She said, and to the palace led her guest; 
Then offer'd incense, and proclaim'd a feast. 
Nor yet less careful for her absent friends, 
Twice ten fat oxen to the ships she sends; 
Besides a hundred boars, a hundred lambs, 
With bleating cries, attend their milky dams; 
And jars of gen'rous wine and spacious bowls 
She gives, to cheer the sailors' drooping souls. 
Now purple hangings clothe the palace walls, 
And sumptuous feasts are made in splendid halls: 
On Tyrian carpets, richly wrought, they dine; 
With loads of massy plate the sideboards shine, 
And antique vases, all of gold emboss'd 
(The gold itself inferior to the cost), 
Of curious work, where on the sides were seen 
The fights and figures of illustrious men, 
From their first founder to the present queen. 
The good Aeneas, paternal care 
Iulus' absence could no longer bear, 
Dispatch'd Achates to the ships in haste, 
To give a glad relation of the past, 
And, fraught with precious gifts, to bring the boy, 
Snatch'd from the ruins of unhappy Troy: 
A robe of tissue, stiff with golden wire; 
An upper vest, once Helen's rich attire, 
From Argos by the fam'd adultress brought, 
With golden flow'rs and winding foliage wrought, 
Her mother Leda's present, when she came 
To ruin Troy and set the world on flame; 
The scepter Priam's eldest daughter bore, 
Her orient necklace, and the crown she wore 
Of double texture, glorious to behold, 
One order set with gems, and one with gold. 
Instructed thus, the wise Achates goes, 
And in his diligence his duty shows. 
But Venus, anxious for her son's affairs, 
New counsels tries, and new designs prepares: 
That Cupid should assume the shape and face 
Of sweet Ascanius, and the sprightly grace; 
Should bring the presents, in her nephew's stead, 
And in Eliza's veins the gentle poison shed: 
For much she fear'd the Tyrians, double-tongued, 
And knew the town to Juno's care belong'd. 
These thoughts by night her golden slumbers broke, 
And thus alarm'd, to winged Love she spoke: 
"My son, my strength, whose mighty pow'r alone 
Controls the Thund'rer on his awful throne, 
To thee thy much-afflicted mother flies, 
And on thy succor and thy faith relies. 
Thou know'st, my son, how Jove's revengeful wife, 
By force and fraud, attempts thy brother's life; 
And often hast thou mourn'd with me his pains. 
Him Dido now with blandishment detains; 
But I suspect the town where Juno reigns. 
For this 't is needful to prevent her art, 
And fire with love the proud Phoenician's heart: 
A love so violent, so strong, so sure, 
As neither age can change, nor art can cure. 
How this may be perform'd, now take my mind: 
Ascanius by his father is design'd 
To come, with presents laden, from the port, 
To gratify the queen, and gain the court. 
I mean to plunge the boy in pleasing sleep, 
And, ravish'd, in Idalian bow'rs to keep, 
Or high Cythera, that the sweet deceit 
May pass unseen, and none prevent the cheat. 
Take thou his form and shape. I beg the grace 
But only for a night's revolving space: 
Thyself a boy, assume a boy's dissembled face; 
That when, amidst the fervor of the feast, 
The Tyrian hugs and fonds thee on her breast, 
And with sweet kisses in her arms constrains, 
Thou may'st infuse thy venom in her veins." 
The God of Love obeys, and sets aside 
His bow and quiver, and his plumy pride; 
He walks Iulus in his mother's sight, 
And in the sweet resemblance takes delight. 
The goddess then to young Ascanius flies, 
And in a pleasing slumber seals his eyes: 
Lull'd in her lap, amidst a train of Loves, 
She gently bears him to her blissful groves, 
Then with a wreath of myrtle crowns his head, 
And softly lays him on a flow'ry bed. 
Cupid meantime assum'd his form and face, 
Foll'wing Achates with a shorter pace, 
And brought the gifts. The queen already sate 
Amidst the Trojan lords, in shining state, 
High on a golden bed: her princely guest 
Was next her side; in order sate the rest. 
Then canisters with bread are heap'd on high; 
Th' attendants water for their hands supply, 
And, having wash'd, with silken towels dry. 
Next fifty handmaids in long order bore 
The censers, and with fumes the gods adore: 
Then youths, and virgins twice as many, join 
To place the dishes, and to serve the wine. 
The Tyrian train, admitted to the feast, 
Approach, and on the painted couches rest. 
All on the Trojan gifts with wonder gaze, 
But view the beauteous boy with more amaze, 
His rosy-color'd cheeks, his radiant eyes, 
His motions, voice, and shape, and all the god's disguise;

Nor pass unprais'd the vest and veil divine, 
Which wand'ring foliage and rich flow'rs entwine. 
But, far above the rest, the royal dame, 
(Already doom'd to love's disastrous flame,) 
With eyes insatiate, and tumultuous joy, 
Beholds the presents, and admires the boy. 
The guileful god about the hero long, 
With children's play, and false embraces, hung; 
Then sought the queen: she took him to her arms 
With greedy pleasure, and devour'd his charms. 
Unhappy Dido little thought what guest, 
How dire a god, she drew so near her breast; 
But he, not mindless of his mother's pray'r, 
Works in the pliant bosom of the fair, 
And molds her heart anew, and blots her former care. 
The dead is to the living love resign'd; 
And all Aeneas enters in her mind. 
Now, when the rage of hunger was appeas'd, 
The meat remov'd, and ev'ry guest was pleas'd, 
The golden bowls with sparkling wine are crown'd, 
And thro' the palace cheerful cries resound. 
From gilded roofs depending lamps display 
Nocturnal beams, that emulate the day. 
A golden bowl, that shone with gems divine, 
The queen commanded to be crown'd with wine: 
The bowl that Belus us'd, and all the Tyrian line. 
Then, silence thro' the hall proclaim'd, she spoke: 
"O hospitable Jove! we thus invoke, 
With solemn rites, thy sacred name and pow'r; 
Bless to both nations this auspicious hour! 
So may the Trojan and the Tyrian line 
In lasting concord from this day combine. 
Thou, Bacchus, god of joys and friendly cheer, 
And gracious Juno, both be present here! 
And you, my lords of Tyre, your vows address 
To Heav'n with mine, to ratify the peace." 
The goblet then she took, with nectar crown'd 
(Sprinkling the first libations on the ground,) 
And rais'd it to her mouth with sober grace; 
Then, sipping, offer'd to the next in place. 
'T was Bitias whom she call'd, a thirsty soul; 
He took challenge, and embrac'd the bowl, 
With pleasure swill'd the gold, nor ceas'd to draw, 
Till he the bottom of the brimmer saw. 
The goblet goes around: Iopas brought 
His golden lyre, and sung what ancient Atlas taught: 
The various labors of the wand'ring moon, 
And whence proceed th' eclipses of the sun; 
Th' original of men and beasts; and whence 
The rains arise, and fires their warmth dispense, 
And fix'd and erring stars dispose their influence; 
What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays 
The summer nights and shortens winter days. 
With peals of shouts the Tyrians praise the song: 
Those peals are echo'd by the Trojan throng. 
Th' unhappy queen with talk prolong'd the night, 
And drank large draughts of love with vast delight; 
Of Priam much enquir'd, of Hector more; 
Then ask'd what arms the swarthy Memnon wore, 
What troops he landed on the Trojan shore; 
The steeds of Diomede varied the discourse, 
And fierce Achilles, with his matchless force; 
At length, as fate and her ill stars requir'd, 
To hear the series of the war desir'd. 
"Relate at large, my godlike guest," she said, 
"The Grecian stratagems, the town betray'd: 
The fatal issue of so long a war, 
Your flight, your wand'rings, and your woes, declare; 
For, since on ev'ry sea, on ev'ry coast, 
Your men have been distress'd, your navy toss'd, 
Sev'n times the sun has either tropic view'd, 
The winter banish'd, and the spring renew'd." 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK II

All were attentive to the godlike man, 
When from his lofty couch he thus began: 
"Great queen, what you command me to relate 
Renews the sad remembrance of our fate: 
An empire from its old foundations rent, 
And ev'ry woe the Trojans underwent; 
A peopled city made a desart place; 
All that I saw, and part of which I was: 
Not ev'n the hardest of our foes could hear, 
Nor stern Ulysses tell without a tear. 
And now the latter watch of wasting night, 
And setting stars, to kindly rest invite; 
But, since you take such int'rest in our woe, 
And Troy's disastrous end desire to know, 
I will restrain my tears, and briefly tell 
What in our last and fatal night befell. 
"By destiny compell'd, and in despair, 
The Greeks grew weary of the tedious war, 
And by Minerva's aid a fabric rear'd, 
Which like a steed of monstrous height appear'd: 
The sides were plank'd with pine; they feign'd it made 
For their return, and this the vow they paid. 
Thus they pretend, but in the hollow side 
Selected numbers of their soldiers hide: 
With inward arms the dire machine they load, 
And iron bowels stuff the dark abode. 
In sight of Troy lies Tenedos, an isle 
(While Fortune did on Priam's empire smile) 
Renown'd for wealth; but, since, a faithless bay, 
Where ships expos'd to wind and weather lay. 
There was their fleet conceal'd. We thought, for Greece 
Their sails were hoisted, and our fears release. 
The Trojans, coop'd within their walls so long, 
Unbar their gates, and issue in a throng, 
Like swarming bees, and with delight survey 
The camp deserted, where the Grecians lay: 
The quarters of the sev'ral chiefs they show'd; 
Here Phoenix, here Achilles, made abode; 
Here join'd the battles; there the navy rode. 
Part on the pile their wond'ring eyes employ: 
The pile by Pallas rais'd to ruin Troy. 
Thymoetes first ('t is doubtful whether hir'd, 
Or so the Trojan destiny requir'd) 
Mov'd that the ramparts might be broken down, 
To lodge the monster fabric in the town. 
But Capys, and the rest of sounder mind, 
The fatal present to the flames designed, 
Or to the wat'ry deep; at least to bore 
The hollow sides, and hidden frauds explore. 
The giddy vulgar, as their fancies guide, 
With noise say nothing, and in parts divide. 
Laocoon, follow'd by a num'rous crowd, 
Ran from the fort, and cried, from far, aloud: 
'O wretched countrymen! what fury reigns? 
What more than madness has possess'd your brains? 
Think you the Grecians from your coasts are gone? 
And are Ulysses' arts no better known? 
This hollow fabric either must inclose, 
Within its blind recess, our secret foes; 
Or 't is an engine rais'd above the town, 
T' o'erlook the walls, and then to batter down. 
Somewhat is sure design'd, by fraud or force: 
Trust not their presents, nor admit the horse.' 
Thus having said, against the steed he threw 
His forceful spear, which, hissing as flew, 
Pierc'd thro' the yielding planks of jointed wood, 
And trembling in the hollow belly stood. 
The sides, transpierc'd, return a rattling sound, 
And groans of Greeks inclos'd come issuing thro' the wound

And, had not Heav'n the fall of Troy design'd, 
Or had not men been fated to be blind, 
Enough was said and done t'inspire a better mind. 
Then had our lances pierc'd the treach'rous wood, 
And Ilian tow'rs and Priam's empire stood. 
Meantime, with shouts, the Trojan shepherds bring 
A captive Greek, in bands, before the king; 
Taken to take; who made himself their prey, 
T' impose on their belief, and Troy betray; 
Fix'd on his aim, and obstinately bent 
To die undaunted, or to circumvent. 
About the captive, tides of Trojans flow; 
All press to see, and some insult the foe. 
Now hear how well the Greeks their wiles disguis'd; 
Behold a nation in a man compris'd. 
Trembling the miscreant stood, unarm'd and bound; 
He star'd, and roll'd his haggard eyes around, 
Then said: 'Alas! what earth remains, what sea 
Is open to receive unhappy me? 
What fate a wretched fugitive attends, 
Scorn'd by my foes, abandon'd by my friends?' 
He said, and sigh'd, and cast a rueful eye: 
Our pity kindles, and our passions die. 
We cheer youth to make his own defense, 
And freely tell us what he was, and whence: 
What news he could impart, we long to know, 
And what to credit from a captive foe. 
"His fear at length dismiss'd, he said: 'Whate'er 
My fate ordains, my words shall be sincere: 
I neither can nor dare my birth disclaim; 
Greece is my country, Sinon is my name. 
Tho' plung'd by Fortune's pow'r in misery, 
'T is not in Fortune's pow'r to make me lie. 
If any chance has hither brought the name 
Of Palamedes, not unknown to fame, 
Who suffer'd from the malice of the times, 
Accus'd and sentenc'd for pretended crimes, 
Because these fatal wars he would prevent; 
Whose death the wretched Greeks too late lament- 
Me, then a boy, my father, poor and bare 
Of other means, committed to his care, 
His kinsman and companion in the war. 
While Fortune favor'd, while his arms support 
The cause, and rul'd the counsels, of the court, 
I made some figure there; nor was my name 
Obscure, nor I without my share of fame. 
But when Ulysses, with fallacious arts, 
Had made impression in the people's hearts, 
And forg'd a treason in my patron's name 
(I speak of things too far divulg'd by fame), 
My kinsman fell. Then I, without support, 
In private mourn'd his loss, and left the court. 
Mad as I was, I could not bear his fate 
With silent grief, but loudly blam'd the state, 
And curs'd the direful author of my woes. 
'T was told again; and hence my ruin rose. 
I threaten'd, if indulgent Heav'n once more 
Would land me safely on my native shore, 
His death with double vengeance to restore. 
This mov'd the murderer's hate; and soon ensued 
Th' effects of malice from a man so proud. 
Ambiguous rumors thro' the camp he spread, 
And sought, by treason, my devoted head; 
New crimes invented; left unturn'd no stone, 
To make my guilt appear, and hide his own; 
Till Calchas was by force and threat'ning wrought- 
But why- why dwell I on that anxious thought? 
If on my nation just revenge you seek, 
And 't is t' appear a foe, t' appear a Greek; 
Already you my name and country know; 
Assuage your thirst of blood, and strike the blow: 
My death will both the kingly brothers please, 
And set insatiate Ithacus at ease.' 
This fair unfinish'd tale, these broken starts, 
Rais'd expectations in our longing hearts: 
Unknowing as we were in Grecian arts. 
His former trembling once again renew'd, 
With acted fear, the villain thus pursued: 
"'Long had the Grecians (tir'd with fruitless care, 
And wearied with an unsuccessful war) 
Resolv'd to raise the siege, and leave the town; 
And, had the gods permitted, they had gone; 
But oft the wintry seas and southern winds 
Withstood their passage home, and chang'd their minds. 
Portents and prodigies their souls amaz'd; 
But most, when this stupendous pile was rais'd: 
Then flaming meteors, hung in air, were seen, 
And thunders rattled thro' a sky serene. 
Dismay'd, and fearful of some dire event, 
Eurypylus t' enquire their fate was sent. 
He from the gods this dreadful answer brought: 
"O Grecians, when the Trojan shores you sought, 
Your passage with a virgin's blood was bought: 
So must your safe return be bought again, 
And Grecian blood once more atone the main." 
The spreading rumor round the people ran; 
All fear'd, and each believ'd himself the man. 
Ulysses took th' advantage of their fright; 
Call'd Calchas, and produc'd in open sight: 
Then bade him name the wretch, ordain'd by fate 
The public victim, to redeem the state. 
Already some presag'd the dire event, 
And saw what sacrifice Ulysses meant. 
For twice five days the good old seer withstood 
Th' intended treason, and was dumb to blood, 
Till, tir'd, with endless clamors and pursuit 
Of Ithacus, he stood no longer mute; 
But, as it was agreed, pronounc'd that I 
Was destin'd by the wrathful gods to die. 
All prais'd the sentence, pleas'd the storm should fall 
On one alone, whose fury threaten'd all. 
The dismal day was come; the priests prepare 
Their leaven'd cakes, and fillets for my hair. 
I follow'd nature's laws, and must avow 
I broke my bonds and fled the fatal blow. 
Hid in a weedy lake all night I lay, 
Secure of safety when they sail'd away. 
But now what further hopes for me remain, 
To see my friends, or native soil, again; 
My tender infants, or my careful sire, 
Whom they returning will to death require; 
Will perpetrate on them their first design, 
And take the forfeit of their heads for mine? 
Which, O! if pity mortal minds can move, 
If there be faith below, or gods above, 
If innocence and truth can claim desert, 
Ye Trojans, from an injur'd wretch avert.' 
"False tears true pity move; the king commands 
To loose his fetters, and unbind his hands: 
Then adds these friendly words: 'Dismiss thy fears; 
Forget the Greeks; be mine as thou wert theirs. 
But truly tell, was it for force or guile, 
Or some religious end, you rais'd the pile?' 
Thus said the king. He, full of fraudful arts, 
This well-invented tale for truth imparts: 
'Ye lamps of heav'n!' he said, and lifted high 
His hands now free, 'thou venerable sky! 
Inviolable pow'rs, ador'd with dread! 
Ye fatal fillets, that once bound this head! 
Ye sacred altars, from whose flames I fled! 
Be all of you adjur'd; and grant I may, 
Without a crime, th' ungrateful Greeks betray, 
Reveal the secrets of the guilty state, 
And justly punish whom I justly hate! 
But you, O king, preserve the faith you gave, 
If I, to save myself, your empire save. 
The Grecian hopes, and all th' attempts they made, 
Were only founded on Minerva's aid. 
But from the time when impious Diomede, 
And false Ulysses, that inventive head, 
Her fatal image from the temple drew, 
The sleeping guardians of the castle slew, 
Her virgin statue with their bloody hands 
Polluted, and profan'd her holy bands; 
From thence the tide of fortune left their shore, 
And ebb'd much faster than it flow'd before: 
Their courage languish'd, as their hopes decay'd; 
And Pallas, now averse, refus'd her aid. 
Nor did the goddess doubtfully declare 
Her alter'd mind and alienated care. 
When first her fatal image touch'd the ground, 
She sternly cast her glaring eyes around, 
That sparkled as they roll'd, and seem'd to threat: 
Her heav'nly limbs distill'd a briny sweat. 
Thrice from the ground she leap'd, was seen to wield 
Her brandish'd lance, and shake her horrid shield. 
Then Calchas bade our host for flight 
And hope no conquest from the tedious war, 
Till first they sail'd for Greece; with pray'rs besought

Her injur'd pow'r, and better omens brought. 
And now their navy plows the wat'ry main, 
Yet soon expect it on your shores again, 
With Pallas pleas'd; as Calchas did ordain. 
But first, to reconcile the blue-ey'd maid 
For her stol'n statue and her tow'r betray'd, 
Warn'd by the seer, to her offended name 
We rais'd and dedicate this wondrous frame, 
So lofty, lest thro' your forbidden gates 
It pass, and intercept our better fates: 
For, once admitted there, our hopes are lost; 
And Troy may then a new Palladium boast; 
For so religion and the gods ordain, 
That, if you violate with hands profane 
Minerva's gift, your town in flames shall burn, 
(Which omen, O ye gods, on Graecia turn!) 
But if it climb, with your assisting hands, 
The Trojan walls, and in the city stands; 
Then Troy shall Argos and Mycenae burn, 
And the reverse of fate on us return.' 
"With such deceits he gain'd their easy hearts, 
Too prone to credit his perfidious arts. 
What Diomede, nor Thetis' greater son, 
A thousand ships, nor ten years' siege, had done- 
False tears and fawning words the city won. 
"A greater omen, and of worse portent, 
Did our unwary minds with fear torment, 
Concurring to produce the dire event. 
Laocoon, Neptune's priest by lot that year, 
With solemn pomp then sacrific'd a steer; 
When, dreadful to behold, from sea we spied 
Two serpents, rank'd abreast, the seas divide, 
And smoothly sweep along the swelling tide. 
Their flaming crests above the waves they show; 
Their bellies seem to burn the seas below; 
Their speckled tails advance to steer their course, 
And on the sounding shore the flying billows force. 
And now the strand, and now the plain they held; 
Their ardent eyes with bloody streaks were fill'd; 
Their nimble tongues they brandish'd as they came, 
And lick'd their hissing jaws, that sputter'd flame. 
We fled amaz'd; their destin'd way they take, 
And to Laocoon and his children make; 
And first around the tender boys they wind, 
Then with their sharpen'd fangs their limbs and bodies grind.

The wretched father, running to their aid 
With pious haste, but vain, they next invade; 
Twice round his waist their winding volumes roll'd; 
And twice about his gasping throat they fold. 
The priest thus doubly chok'd, their crests divide, 
And tow'ring o'er his head in triumph ride. 
With both his hands he labors at the knots; 
His holy fillets the blue venom blots; 
His roaring fills the flitting air around. 
Thus, when an ox receives a glancing wound, 
He breaks his bands, the fatal altar flies, 
And with loud bellowings breaks the yielding skies. 
Their tasks perform'd, the serpents quit their prey, 
And to the tow'r of Pallas make their way: 
Couch'd at her feet, they lie protected there 
By her large buckler and protended spear. 
Amazement seizes all; the gen'ral cry 
Proclaims Laocoon justly doom'd to die, 
Whose hand the will of Pallas had withstood, 
And dared to violate the sacred wood. 
All vote t' admit the steed, that vows be paid 
And incense offer'd to th' offended maid. 
A spacious breach is made; the town lies bare; 
Some hoisting-levers, some the wheels prepare 
And fasten to the horse's feet; the rest 
With cables haul along th' unwieldly beast. 
Each on his fellow for assistance calls; 
At length the fatal fabric mounts the walls, 
Big with destruction. Boys with chaplets crown'd, 
And choirs of virgins, sing and dance around. 
Thus rais'd aloft, and then descending down, 
It enters o'er our heads, and threats the town. 
O sacred city, built by hands divine! 
O valiant heroes of the Trojan line! 
Four times he struck: as oft the clashing sound 
Of arms was heard, and inward groans rebound. 
Yet, mad with zeal, and blinded with our fate, 
We haul along the horse in solemn state; 
Then place the dire portent within the tow'r. 
Cassandra cried, and curs'd th' unhappy hour; 
Foretold our fate; but, by the god's decree, 
All heard, and none believ'd the prophecy. 
With branches we the fanes adorn, and waste, 
In jollity, the day ordain'd to be the last. 
Meantime the rapid heav'ns roll'd down the light, 
And on the shaded ocean rush'd the night; 
Our men, secure, nor guards nor sentries held, 
But easy sleep their weary limbs compell'd. 
The Grecians had embark'd their naval pow'rs 
From Tenedos, and sought our well-known shores, 
Safe under covert of the silent night, 
And guided by th' imperial galley's light; 
When Sinon, favor'd by the partial gods, 
Unlock'd the horse, and op'd his dark abodes; 
Restor'd to vital air our hidden foes, 
Who joyful from their long confinement rose. 
Tysander bold, and Sthenelus their guide, 
And dire Ulysses down the cable slide: 
Then Thoas, Athamas, and Pyrrhus haste; 
Nor was the Podalirian hero last, 
Nor injur'd Menelaus, nor the fam'd 
Epeus, who the fatal engine fram'd. 
A nameless crowd succeed; their forces join 
T' invade the town, oppress'd with sleep and wine. 
Those few they find awake first meet their fate; 
Then to their fellows they unbar the gate. 
"'T was in the dead of night, when sleep repairs 
Our bodies worn with toils, our minds with cares, 
When Hector's ghost before my sight appears: 
A bloody shroud he seem'd, and bath'd in tears; 
Such as he was, when, by Pelides slain, 
Thessalian coursers dragg'd him o'er the plain. 
Swoln were his feet, as when the thongs were thrust 
Thro' the bor'd holes; his body black with dust; 
Unlike that Hector who return'd from toils 
Of war, triumphant, in Aeacian spoils, 
Or him who made the fainting Greeks retire, 
And launch'd against their navy Phrygian fire. 
His hair and beard stood stiffen'd with his gore; 
And all the wounds he for his country bore 
Now stream'd afresh, and with new purple ran. 
I wept to see the visionary man, 
And, while my trance continued, thus began: 
'O light of Trojans, and support of Troy, 
Thy father's champion, and thy country's joy! 
O, long expected by thy friends! from whence 
Art thou so late return'd for our defense? 
Do we behold thee, wearied as we are 
With length of labors, and with toils of war? 
After so many fun'rals of thy own 
Art thou restor'd to thy declining town? 
But say, what wounds are these? What new disgrace 
Deforms the manly features of thy face?' 
"To this the specter no reply did frame, 
But answer'd to the cause for which he came, 
And, groaning from the bottom of his breast, 
This warning in these mournful words express'd: 
'O goddess-born! escape, by timely flight, 
The flames and horrors of this fatal night. 
The foes already have possess'd the wall; 
Troy nods from high, and totters to her fall. 
Enough is paid to Priam's royal name, 
More than enough to duty and to fame. 
If by a mortal hand my father's throne 
Could be defended, 't was by mine alone. 
Now Troy to thee commends her future state, 
And gives her gods companions of thy fate: 
From their assistance walls expect, 
Which, wand'ring long, at last thou shalt erect.' 
He said, and brought me, from their blest abodes, 
The venerable statues of the gods, 
With ancient Vesta from the sacred choir, 
The wreaths and relics of th' immortal fire. 
"Now peals of shouts come thund'ring from afar, 
Cries, threats, and loud laments, and mingled war: 
The noise approaches, tho' our palace stood 
Aloof from streets, encompass'd with a wood. 
Louder, and yet more loud, I hear th' alarms 
Of human cries distinct, and clashing arms. 
Fear broke my slumbers; I no longer stay, 
But mount the terrace, thence the town survey, 
And hearken what the frightful sounds convey. 
Thus, when a flood of fire by wind is borne, 
Crackling it rolls, and mows the standing corn; 
Or deluges, descending on the plains, 
Sweep o'er the yellow year, destroy the pains 
Of lab'ring oxen and the peasant's gains; 
Unroot the forest oaks, and bear away 
Flocks, folds, and trees, and undistinguish'd prey: 
The shepherd climbs the cliff, and sees from far 
The wasteful ravage of the wat'ry war. 
Then Hector's faith was manifestly clear'd, 
And Grecian frauds in open light appear'd. 
The palace of Deiphobus ascends 
In smoky flames, and catches on his friends. 
Ucalegon burns next: the seas are bright 
With splendor not their own, and shine with Trojan light.

New clamors and new clangors now arise, 
The sound of trumpets mix'd with fighting cries. 
With frenzy seiz'd, I run to meet th' alarms, 
Resolv'd on death, resolv'd to die in arms, 
But first to gather friends, with them t' oppose 
(If fortune favor'd) and repel the foes; 
Spurr'd by my courage, by my country fir'd, 
With sense of honor and revenge inspir'd. 
"Pantheus, Apollo's priest, a sacred name, 
Had scap'd the Grecian swords, and pass'd the flame: 
With relics loaden. to my doors he fled, 
And by the hand his tender grandson led. 
'What hope, O Pantheus? whither can we run? 
Where make a stand? and what may yet be done?' 
Scarce had I said, when Pantheus, with a groan: 
'Troy is no more, and Ilium was a town! 
The fatal day, th' appointed hour, is come, 
When wrathful Jove's irrevocable doom 
Transfers the Trojan state to Grecian hands. 
The fire consumes the town, the foe commands; 
And armed hosts, an unexpected force, 
Break from the bowels of the fatal horse. 
Within the gates, proud Sinon throws about 
The flames; and foes for entrance press without, 
With thousand others, whom I fear to name, 
More than from Argos or Mycenae came. 
To sev'ral posts their parties they divide; 
Some block the narrow streets, some scour the wide: 
The bold they kill, th' unwary they surprise; 
Who fights finds death, and death finds him who flies. 
The warders of the gate but scarce maintain 
Th' unequal combat, and resist in vain.' 
"I heard; and Heav'n, that well-born souls inspires, 
Prompts me thro' lifted swords and rising fires 
To run where clashing arms and clamor calls, 
And rush undaunted to defend the walls. 
Ripheus and Iph'itus by my side engage, 
For valor one renown'd, and one for age. 
Dymas and Hypanis by moonlight knew 
My motions and my mien, and to my party drew; 
With young Coroebus, who by love was led 
To win renown and fair Cassandra's bed, 
And lately brought his troops to Priam's aid, 
Forewarn'd in vain by the prophetic maid. 
Whom when I saw resolv'd in arms to fall, 
And that one spirit animated all: 
'Brave souls!' said I,- 'but brave, alas! in vain- 
Come, finish what our cruel fates ordain. 
You see the desp'rate state of our affairs, 
And heav'n's protecting pow'rs are deaf to pray'rs. 
The passive gods behold the Greeks defile 
Their temples, and abandon to the spoil 
Their own abodes: we, feeble few, conspire 
To save a sinking town, involv'd in fire. 
Then let us fall, but fall amidst our foes: 
Despair of life the means of living shows.' 
So bold a speech incourag'd their desire 
Of death, and added fuel to their fire. 
"As hungry wolves, with raging appetite, 
Scour thro' the fields, nor fear the stormy night- 
Their whelps at home expect the promis'd food, 
And long to temper their dry chaps in blood- 
So rush'd we forth at once; resolv'd to die, 
Resolv'd, in death, the last extremes to try. 
We leave the narrow lanes behind, and dare 
Th' unequal combat in the public square: 
Night was our friend; our leader was despair. 
What tongue can tell the slaughter of that night? 
What eyes can weep the sorrows and affright? 
An ancient and imperial city falls: 
The streets are fill'd with frequent funerals; 
Houses and holy temples float in blood, 
And hostile nations make a common flood. 
Not only Trojans fall; but, in their turn, 
The vanquish'd triumph, and the victors mourn. 
Ours take new courage from despair and night: 
Confus'd the fortune is, confus'd the fight. 
All parts resound with tumults, plaints, and fears; 
And grisly Death in sundry shapes appears. 
Androgeos fell among us, with his band, 
Who thought us Grecians newly come to land. 
'From whence,' said he, 'my friends, this long delay? 
You loiter, while the spoils are borne away: 
Our ships are laden with the Trojan store; 
And you, like truants, come too late ashore.' 
He said, but soon corrected his mistake, 
Found, by the doubtful answers which we make: 
Amaz'd, he would have shunn'd th' unequal fight; 
But we, more num'rous, intercept his flight. 
As when some peasant, in a bushy brake, 
Has with unwary footing press'd a snake; 
He starts aside, astonish'd, when he spies 
His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes; 
So from our arms surpris'd Androgeos flies. 
In vain; for him and his we compass'd round, 
Possess'd with fear, unknowing of the ground, 
And of their lives an easy conquest found. 
Thus Fortune on our first endeavor smil'd. 
Coroebus then, with youthful hopes beguil'd, 
Swoln with success, and a daring mind, 
This new invention fatally design'd. 
'My friends,' said he, 'since Fortune shows the way, 
'T is fit we should th' auspicious guide obey. 
For what has she these Grecian arms bestow'd, 
But their destruction, and the Trojans' good? 
Then change we shields, and their devices bear: 
Let fraud supply the want of force in war. 
They find us arms.' This said, himself he dress'd 
In dead Androgeos' spoils, his upper vest, 
His painted buckler, and his plumy crest. 
Thus Ripheus, Dymas, all the Trojan train, 
Lay down their own attire, and strip the slain. 
Mix'd with the Greeks, we go with ill presage, 
Flatter'd with hopes to glut our greedy rage; 
Unknown, assaulting whom we blindly meet, 
And strew with Grecian carcasses the street. 
Thus while their straggling parties we defeat, 
Some to the shore and safer ships retreat; 
And some, oppress'd with more ignoble fear, 
Remount the hollow horse, and pant in secret there. 
"But, ah! what use of valor can be made, 
When heav'n's propitious pow'rs refuse their aid! 
Behold the royal prophetess, the fair 
Cassandra, dragg'd by her dishevel'd hair, 
Whom not Minerva's shrine, nor sacred bands, 
In safety could protect from sacrilegious hands: 
On heav'n she cast her eyes, she sigh'd, she cried- 
'T was all she could- her tender arms were tied. 
So sad a sight Coroebus could not bear; 
But, fir'd with rage, distracted with despair, 
Amid the barb'rous ravishers he flew: 
Our leader's rash example we pursue. 
But storms of stones, from the proud temple's height, 
Pour down, and on our batter'd helms alight: 
We from our friends receiv'd this fatal blow, 
Who thought us Grecians, as we seem'd in show. 
They aim at the mistaken crests, from high; 
And ours beneath the pond'rous ruin lie. 
Then, mov'd with anger and disdain, to see 
Their troops dispers'd, the royal virgin free, 
The Grecians rally, and their pow'rs unite, 
With fury charge us, and renew the fight. 
The brother kings with Ajax join their force, 
And the whole squadron of Thessalian horse. 
"Thus, when the rival winds their quarrel try, 
Contending for the kingdom of the sky, 
South, east, and west, on airy coursers borne; 
The whirlwind gathers, and the woods are torn: 
Then Nereus strikes the deep; the billows rise, 
And, mix'd with ooze and sand, pollute the skies. 
The troops we squander'd first again appear 
From several quarters, and enclose the rear. 
They first observe, and to the rest betray, 
Our diff'rent speech; our borrow'd arms survey. 
Oppress'd with odds, we fall; Coroebus first, 
At Pallas' altar, by Peneleus pierc'd. 
Then Ripheus follow'd, in th' unequal fight; 
Just of his word, observant of the right: 
Heav'n thought not so. Dymas their fate attends, 
With Hypanis, mistaken by their friends. 
Nor, Pantheus, thee, thy miter, nor the bands 
Of awful Phoebus, sav'd from impious hands. 
Ye Trojan flames, your testimony bear, 
What I perform'd, and what I suffer'd there; 
No sword avoiding in the fatal strife, 
Expos'd to death, and prodigal of life; 
Witness, ye heavens! I live not by my fault: 
I strove to have deserv'd the death I sought. 
But, when I could not fight, and would have died, 
Borne off to distance by the growing tide, 
Old Iphitus and I were hurried thence, 
With Pelias wounded, and without defense. 
New clamors from th' invested palace ring: 
We run to die, or disengage the king. 
So hot th' assault, so high the tumult rose, 
While ours defend, and while the Greeks oppose 
As all the Dardan and Argolic race 
Had been contracted in that narrow space; 
Or as all Ilium else were void of fear, 
And tumult, war, and slaughter, only there. 
Their targets in a tortoise cast, the foes, 
Secure advancing, to the turrets rose: 
Some mount the scaling ladders; some, more bold, 
Swerve upwards, and by posts and pillars hold; 
Their left hand gripes their bucklers in th' ascent, 
While with their right they seize the battlement. 
From their demolish'd tow'rs the Trojans throw 
Huge heaps of stones, that, falling, crush the foe; 
And heavy beams and rafters from the sides 
(Such arms their last necessity provides) 
And gilded roofs, come tumbling from on high, 
The marks of state and ancient royalty. 
The guards below, fix'd in the pass, attend 
The charge undaunted, and the gate defend. 
Renew'd in courage with recover'd breath, 
A second time we ran to tempt our death, 
To clear the palace from the foe, succeed 
The weary living, and revenge the dead. 
"A postern door, yet unobserv'd and free, 
Join'd by the length of a blind gallery, 
To the king's closet led: a way well known 
To Hector's wife, while Priam held the throne, 
Thro' which she brought Astyanax, unseen, 
To cheer his grandsire and his grandsire's queen. 
Thro' this we pass, and mount the tow'r, from whence 
With unavailing arms the Trojans make defense. 
From this the trembling king had oft descried 
The Grecian camp, and saw their navy ride. 
Beams from its lofty height with swords we hew, 
Then, wrenching with our hands, th' assault renew; 
And, where the rafters on the columns meet, 
We push them headlong with our arms and feet. 
The lightning flies not swifter than the fall, 
Nor thunder louder than the ruin'd wall: 
Down goes the top at once; the Greeks beneath 
Are piecemeal torn, or pounded into death. 
Yet more succeed, and more to death are sent; 
We cease not from above, nor they below relent. 
Before the gate stood Pyrrhus, threat'ning loud, 
With glitt'ring arms conspicuous in the crowd. 
So shines, renew'd in youth, the crested snake, 
Who slept the winter in a thorny brake, 
And, casting off his slough when spring returns, 
Now looks aloft, and with new glory burns; 
Restor'd with poisonous herbs, his ardent sides 
Reflect the sun; and rais'd on spires he rides; 
High o'er the grass, hissing he rolls along, 
And brandishes by fits his forky tongue. 
Proud Periphas, and fierce Automedon, 
His father's charioteer, together run 
To force the gate; the Scyrian infantry 
Rush on in crowds, and the barr'd passage free. 
Ent'ring the court, with shouts the skies they rend; 
And flaming firebrands to the roofs ascend. 
Himself, among the foremost, deals his blows, 
And with his ax repeated strokes bestows 
On the strong doors; then all their shoulders ply, 
Till from the posts the brazen hinges fly. 
He hews apace; the double bars at length 
Yield to his ax and unresisted strength. 
A mighty breach is made: the rooms conceal'd 
Appear, and all the palace is reveal'd; 
The halls of audience, and of public state, 
And where the lonely queen in secret sate. 
Arm'd soldiers now by trembling maids are seen, 
With not a door, and scarce a space, between. 
The house is fill'd with loud laments and cries, 
And shrieks of women rend the vaulted skies; 
The fearful matrons run from place to place, 
And kiss the thresholds, and the posts embrace. 
The fatal work inhuman Pyrrhus plies, 
And all his father sparkles in his eyes; 
Nor bars, nor fighting guards, his force sustain: 
The bars are broken, and the guards are slain. 
In rush the Greeks, and all the apartments fill; 
Those few defendants whom they find, they kill. 
Not with so fierce a rage the foaming flood 
Roars, when he finds his rapid course withstood; 
Bears down the dams with unresisted sway, 
And sweeps the cattle and the cots away. 
These eyes beheld him when he march'd between 
The brother kings: I saw th' unhappy queen, 
The hundred wives, and where old Priam stood, 
To stain his hallow'd altar with his brood. 
The fifty nuptial beds (such hopes had he, 
So large a promise, of a progeny), 
The posts, of plated gold, and hung with spoils, 
Fell the reward of the proud victor's toils. 
Where'er the raging fire had left a space, 
The Grecians enter and possess the place. 
"Perhaps you may of Priam's fate enquire. 
He, when he saw his regal town on fire, 
His ruin'd palace, and his ent'ring foes, 
On ev'ry side inevitable woes, 
In arms, disus'd, invests his limbs, decay'd, 
Like them, with age; a late and useless aid. 
His feeble shoulders scarce the weight sustain; 
Loaded, not arm'd, he creeps along with pain, 
Despairing of success, ambitious to be slain! 
Uncover'd but by heav'n, there stood in view 
An altar; near the hearth a laurel grew, 
Dodder'd with age, whose boughs encompass round 
The household gods, and shade the holy ground. 
Here Hecuba, with all her helpless train 
Of dames, for shelter sought, but sought in vain. 
Driv'n like a flock of doves along the sky, 
Their images they hug, and to their altars fly. 
The Queen, when she beheld her trembling lord, 
And hanging by his side a heavy sword, 
'What rage,' she cried, 'has seiz'd my husband's mind? 
What arms are these, and to what use design'd? 
These times want other aids! Were Hector here, 
Ev'n Hector now in vain, like Priam, would appear. 
With us, one common shelter thou shalt find, 
Or in one common fate with us be join'd.' 
She said, and with a last salute embrac'd 
The poor old man, and by the laurel plac'd. 
Behold! Polites, one of Priam's sons, 
Pursued by Pyrrhus, there for safety runs. 
Thro' swords and foes, amaz'd and hurt, he flies 
Thro' empty courts and open galleries. 
Him Pyrrhus, urging with his lance, pursues, 
And often reaches, and his thrusts renews. 
The youth, transfix'd, with lamentable cries, 
Expires before his wretched parent's eyes: 
Whom gasping at his feet when Priam saw, 
The fear of death gave place to nature's law; 
And, shaking more with anger than with age, 
'The gods,' said he, 'requite thy brutal rage! 
As sure they will, barbarian, sure they must, 
If there be gods in heav'n, and gods be just- 
Who tak'st in wrongs an insolent delight; 
With a son's death t' infect a father's sight. 
Not he, whom thou and lying fame conspire 
To call thee his- not he, thy vaunted sire, 
Thus us'd my wretched age: the gods he fear'd, 
The laws of nature and of nations heard. 
He cheer'd my sorrows, and, for sums of gold, 
The bloodless carcass of my Hector sold; 
Pitied the woes a parent underwent, 
And sent me back in safety from his tent.' 
"This said, his feeble hand a javelin threw, 
Which, flutt'ring, seem'd to loiter as it flew: 
Just, and but barely, to the mark it held, 
And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield. 
"Then Pyrrhus thus: 'Go thou from me to fate, 
And to my father my foul deeds relate. 
Now die!' With that he dragg'd the trembling sire, 
Slidd'ring thro' clotter'd blood and holy mire, 
(The mingled paste his murder'd son had made,) 
Haul'd from beneath the violated shade, 
And on the sacred pile the royal victim laid. 
His right hand held his bloody falchion bare, 
His left he twisted in his hoary hair; 
Then, with a speeding thrust, his heart he found: 
The lukewarm blood came rushing thro' the wound, 
And sanguine streams distain'd the sacred ground. 
Thus Priam fell, and shar'd one common fate 
With Troy in ashes, and his ruin'd state: 
He, who the scepter of all Asia sway'd, 
Whom monarchs like domestic slaves obey'd. 
On the bleak shore now lies th' abandon'd king, 
A headless carcass, and a nameless thing. 
"Then, not before, I felt my cruddled blood 
Congeal with fear, my hair with horror stood: 
My father's image fill'd my pious mind, 
Lest equal years might equal fortune find. 
Again I thought on my forsaken wife, 
And trembled for my son's abandon'd life. 
I look'd about, but found myself alone, 
Deserted at my need! My friends were gone. 
Some spent with toil, some with despair oppress'd, 
Leap'd headlong from the heights; the flames consum'd the rest.

Thus, wand'ring in my way, without a guide, 
The graceless Helen in the porch I spied 
Of Vesta's temple; there she lurk'd alone; 
Muffled she sate, and, what she could, unknown: 
But, by the flames that cast their blaze around, 
That common bane of Greece and Troy I found. 
For Ilium burnt, she dreads the Trojan sword; 
More dreads the vengeance of her injur'd lord; 
Ev'n by those gods who refug'd her abhorr'd. 
Trembling with rage, the strumpet I regard, 
Resolv'd to give her guilt the due reward: 
'Shall she triumphant sail before the wind, 
And leave in flames unhappy Troy behind? 
Shall she her kingdom and her friends review, 
In state attended with a captive crew, 
While unreveng'd the good old Priam falls, 
And Grecian fires consume the Trojan walls? 
For this the Phrygian fields and Xanthian flood 
Were swell'd with bodies, and were drunk with blood? 
'T is true, a soldier can small honor gain, 
And boast no conquest, from a woman slain: 
Yet shall the fact not pass without applause, 
Of vengeance taken in so just a cause; 
The punish'd crime shall set my soul at ease, 
And murm'ring manes of my friends appease.' 
Thus while I rave, a gleam of pleasing light 
Spread o'er the place; and, shining heav'nly bright, 
My mother stood reveal'd before my sight 
Never so radiant did her eyes appear; 
Not her own star confess'd a light so clear: 
Great in her charms, as when on gods above 
She looks, and breathes herself into their love. 
She held my hand, the destin'd blow to break; 
Then from her rosy lips began to speak: 
'My son, from whence this madness, this neglect 
Of my commands, and those whom I protect? 
Why this unmanly rage? Recall to mind 
Whom you forsake, what pledges leave behind. 
Look if your helpless father yet survive, 
Or if Ascanius or Creusa live. 
Around your house the greedy Grecians err; 
And these had perish'd in the nightly war, 
But for my presence and protecting care. 
Not Helen's face, nor Paris, was in fault; 
But by the gods was this destruction brought. 
Now cast your eyes around, while I dissolve 
The mists and films that mortal eyes involve, 
Purge from your sight the dross, and make you see 
The shape of each avenging deity. 
Enlighten'd thus, my just commands fulfil, 
Nor fear obedience to your mother's will. 
Where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies, 
Stones rent from stones; where clouds of dust arise- 
Amid that smother Neptune holds his place, 
Below the wall's foundation drives his mace, 
And heaves the building from the solid base. 
Look where, in arms, imperial Juno stands 
Full in the Scaean gate, with loud commands, 
Urging on shore the tardy Grecian bands. 
See! Pallas, of her snaky buckler proud, 
Bestrides the tow'r, refulgent thro' the cloud: 
See! Jove new courage to the foe supplies, 
And arms against the town the partial deities. 
Haste hence, my son; this fruitless labor end: 
Haste, where your trembling spouse and sire attend: 
Haste; and a mother's care your passage shall befriend.'

She said, and swiftly vanish'd from my sight, 
Obscure in clouds and gloomy shades of night. 
I look'd, I listen'd; dreadful sounds I hear; 
And the dire forms of hostile gods appear. 
Troy sunk in flames I saw (nor could prevent), 
And Ilium from its old foundations rent; 
Rent like a mountain ash, which dar'd the winds, 
And stood the sturdy strokes of lab'ring hinds. 
About the roots the cruel ax resounds; 
The stumps are pierc'd with oft-repeated wounds: 
The war is felt on high; the nodding crown 
Now threats a fall, and throws the leafy honors down. 
To their united force it yields, tho' late, 
And mourns with mortal groans th' approaching fate: 
The roots no more their upper load sustain; 
But down she falls, and spreads a ruin thro' the plain. 
"Descending thence, I scape thro' foes and fire: 
Before the goddess, foes and flames retire. 
Arriv'd at home, he, for whose only sake, 
Or most for his, such toils I undertake, 
The good Anchises, whom, by timely flight, 
I purpos'd to secure on Ida's height, 
Refus'd the journey, resolute to die 
And add his fun'rals to the fate of Troy, 
Rather than exile and old age sustain. 
'Go you, whose blood runs warm in ev'ry vein. 
Had Heav'n decreed that I should life enjoy, 
Heav'n had decreed to save unhappy Troy. 
'T is, sure, enough, if not too much, for one, 
Twice to have seen our Ilium overthrown. 
Make haste to save the poor remaining crew, 
And give this useless corpse a long adieu. 
These weak old hands suffice to stop my breath; 
At least the pitying foes will aid my death, 
To take my spoils, and leave my body bare: 
As for my sepulcher, let Heav'n take care. 
'T is long since I, for my celestial wife 
Loath'd by the gods, have dragg'd a ling'ring life; 
Since ev'ry hour and moment I expire, 
Blasted from heav'n by Jove's avenging fire.' 
This oft repeated, he stood fix'd to die: 
Myself, my wife, my son, my family, 
Intreat, pray, beg, and raise a doleful cry- 
'What, will he still persist, on death resolve, 
And in his ruin all his house involve!' 
He still persists his reasons to maintain; 
Our pray'rs, our tears, our loud laments, are vain. 
"Urg'd by despair, again I go to try 
The fate of arms, resolv'd in fight to die: 
'What hope remains, but what my death must give? 
Can I, without so dear a father, live? 
You term it prudence, what I baseness call: 
Could such a word from such a parent fall? 
If Fortune please, and so the gods ordain, 
That nothing should of ruin'd Troy remain, 
And you conspire with Fortune to be slain, 
The way to death is wide, th' approaches near: 
For soon relentless Pyrrhus will appear, 
Reeking with Priam's blood- the wretch who slew 
The son (inhuman) in the father's view, 
And then the sire himself to the dire altar drew. 
O goddess mother, give me back to Fate; 
Your gift was undesir'd, and came too late! 
Did you, for this, unhappy me convey 
Thro' foes and fires, to see my house a prey? 
Shall I my father, wife, and son behold, 
Welt'ring in blood, each other's arms infold? 
Haste! gird my sword, tho' spent and overcome: 
'T is the last summons to receive our doom. 
I hear thee, Fate; and I obey thy call! 
Not unreveng'd the foe shall see my fall. 
Restore me to the yet unfinish'd fight: 
My death is wanting to conclude the night.' 
Arm'd once again, my glitt'ring sword I wield, 
While th' other hand sustains my weighty shield, 
And forth I rush to seek th' abandon'd field. 
I went; but sad Creusa stopp'd my way, 
And cross the threshold in my passage lay, 
Embrac'd my knees, and, when I would have gone, 
Shew'd me my feeble sire and tender son: 
'If death be your design, at least,' said she, 
'Take us along to share your destiny. 
If any farther hopes in arms remain, 
This place, these pledges of your love, maintain. 
To whom do you expose your father's life, 
Your son's, and mine, your now forgotten wife!' 
While thus she fills the house with clam'rous cries, 
Our hearing is diverted by our eyes: 
For, while I held my son, in the short space 
Betwixt our kisses and our last embrace; 
Strange to relate, from young Iulus' head 
A lambent flame arose, which gently spread 
Around his brows, and on his temples fed. 
Amaz'd, with running water we prepare 
To quench the sacred fire, and slake his hair; 
But old Anchises, vers'd in omens, rear'd 
His hands to heav'n, and this request preferr'd: 
'If any vows, almighty Jove, can bend 
Thy will; if piety can pray'rs commend, 
Confirm the glad presage which thou art pleas'd to send.'

Scarce had he said, when, on our left, we hear 
A peal of rattling thunder roll in air: 
There shot a streaming lamp along the sky, 
Which on the winged lightning seem'd to fly; 
From o'er the roof the blaze began to move, 
And, trailing, vanish'd in th' Idaean grove. 
It swept a path in heav'n, and shone a guide, 
Then in a steaming stench of sulphur died. 
"The good old man with suppliant hands implor'd 
The gods' protection, and their star ador'd. 
'Now, now,' said he, 'my son, no more delay! 
I yield, I follow where Heav'n shews the way. 
Keep, O my country gods, our dwelling place, 
And guard this relic of the Trojan race, 
This tender child! These omens are your own, 
And you can yet restore the ruin'd town. 
At least accomplish what your signs foreshow: 
I stand resign'd, and am prepar'd to go.' 
"He said. The crackling flames appear on high. 
And driving sparkles dance along the sky. 
With Vulcan's rage the rising winds conspire, 
And near our palace roll the flood of fire. 
'Haste, my dear father, ('t is no time to wait,) 
And load my shoulders with a willing freight. 
Whate'er befalls, your life shall be my care; 
One death, or one deliv'rance, we will share. 
My hand shall lead our little son; and you, 
My faithful consort, shall our steps pursue. 
Next, you, my servants, heed my strict commands: 
Without the walls a ruin'd temple stands, 
To Ceres hallow'd once; a cypress nigh 
Shoots up her venerable head on high, 
By long religion kept; there bend your feet, 
And in divided parties let us meet. 
Our country gods, the relics, and the bands, 
Hold you, my father, in your guiltless hands: 
In me 't is impious holy things to bear, 
Red as I am with slaughter, new from war, 
Till in some living stream I cleanse the guilt 
Of dire debate, and blood in battle spilt.' 
Thus, ord'ring all that prudence could provide, 
I clothe my shoulders with a lion's hide 
And yellow spoils; then, on my bending back, 
The welcome load of my dear father take; 
While on my better hand Ascanius hung, 
And with unequal paces tripp'd along. 
Creusa kept behind; by choice we stray 
Thro' ev'ry dark and ev'ry devious way. 
I, who so bold and dauntless, just before, 
The Grecian darts and shock of lances bore, 
At ev'ry shadow now am seiz'd with fear, 
Not for myself, but for the charge I bear; 
Till, near the ruin'd gate arriv'd at last, 
Secure, and deeming all the danger past, 
A frightful noise of trampling feet we hear. 
My father, looking thro' the shades, with fear, 
Cried out: 'Haste, haste, my son, the foes are nigh; 
Their swords and shining armor I descry.' 
Some hostile god, for some unknown offense, 
Had sure bereft my mind of better sense; 
For, while thro' winding ways I took my flight, 
And sought the shelter of the gloomy night, 
Alas! I lost Creusa: hard to tell 
If by her fatal destiny she fell, 
Or weary sate, or wander'd with affright; 
But she was lost for ever to my sight. 
I knew not, or reflected, till I meet 
My friends, at Ceres' now deserted seat. 
We met: not one was wanting; only she 
Deceiv'd her friends, her son, and wretched me. 
"What mad expressions did my tongue refuse! 
Whom did I not, of gods or men, accuse! 
This was the fatal blow, that pain'd me more 
Than all I felt from ruin'd Troy before. 
Stung with my loss, and raving with despair, 
Abandoning my now forgotten care, 
Of counsel, comfort, and of hope bereft, 
My sire, my son, my country gods I left. 
In shining armor once again I sheathe 
My limbs, not feeling wounds, nor fearing death. 
Then headlong to the burning walls I run, 
And seek the danger I was forc'd to shun. 
I tread my former tracks; thro' night explore 
Each passage, ev'ry street I cross'd before. 
All things were full of horror and affright, 
And dreadful ev'n the silence of the night. 
Then to my father's house I make repair, 
With some small glimpse of hope to find her there. 
Instead of her, the cruel Greeks I met; 
The house was fill'd with foes, with flames beset. 
Driv'n on the wings of winds, whole sheets of fire, 
Thro' air transported, to the roofs aspire. 
From thence to Priam's palace I resort, 
And search the citadel and desart court. 
Then, unobserv'd, I pass by Juno's church: 
A guard of Grecians had possess'd the porch; 
There Phoenix and Ulysses watch prey, 
And thither all the wealth of Troy convey: 
The spoils which they from ransack'd houses brought, 
And golden bowls from burning altars caught, 
The tables of the gods, the purple vests, 
The people's treasure, and the pomp of priests. 
A rank of wretched youths, with pinion'd hands, 
And captive matrons, in long order stands. 
Then, with ungovern'd madness, I proclaim, 
Thro' all the silent street, Creusa's name: 
Creusa still I call; at length she hears, 
And sudden thro' the shades of night appears- 
Appears, no more Creusa, nor my wife, 
But a pale specter, larger than the life. 
Aghast, astonish'd, and struck dumb with fear, 
I stood; like bristles rose my stiffen'd hair. 
Then thus the ghost began to soothe my grief 
'Nor tears, nor cries, can give the dead relief. 
Desist, my much-lov'd lord,'t indulge your pain; 
You bear no more than what the gods ordain. 
My fates permit me not from hence to fly; 
Nor he, the great controller of the sky. 
Long wand'ring ways for you the pow'rs decree; 
On land hard labors, and a length of sea. 
Then, after many painful years are past, 
On Latium's happy shore you shall be cast, 
Where gentle Tiber from his bed beholds 
The flow'ry meadows, and the feeding folds. 
There end your toils; and there your fates provide 
A quiet kingdom, and a royal bride: 
There fortune shall the Trojan line restore, 
And you for lost Creusa weep no more. 
Fear not that I shall watch, with servile shame, 
Th' imperious looks of some proud Grecian dame; 
Or, stooping to the victor's lust, disgrace 
My goddess mother, or my royal race. 
And now, farewell! The parent of the gods 
Restrains my fleeting soul in her abodes: 
I trust our common issue to your care.' 
She said, and gliding pass'd unseen in air. 
I strove to speak: but horror tied my tongue; 
And thrice about her neck my arms I flung, 
And, thrice deceiv'd, on vain embraces hung. 
Light as an empty dream at break of day, 
Or as a blast of wind, she rush'd away. 
"Thus having pass'd the night in fruitless pain, 
I to my longing friends return again, 
Amaz'd th' augmented number to behold, 
Of men and matrons mix'd, of young and old; 
A wretched exil'd crew together brought, 
With arms appointed, and with treasure fraught, 
Resolv'd, and willing, under my command, 
To run all hazards both of sea and land. 
The Morn began, from Ida, to display 
Her rosy cheeks; and Phosphor led the day: 
Before the gates the Grecians took their post, 
And all pretense of late relief was lost. 
I yield to Fate, unwillingly retire, 
And, loaded, up the hill convey my sire." 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK III

"When Heav'n had overturn'd the Trojan state 
And Priam's throne, by too severe a fate; 
When ruin'd Troy became the Grecians' prey, 
And Ilium's lofty tow'rs in ashes lay; 
Warn'd by celestial omens, we retreat, 
To seek in foreign lands a happier seat. 
Near old Antandros, and at Ida's foot, 
The timber of the sacred groves we cut, 
And build our fleet; uncertain yet to find 
What place the gods for our repose assign'd. 
Friends daily flock; and scarce the kindly spring 
Began to clothe the ground, and birds to sing, 
When old Anchises summon'd all to sea: 
The crew my father and the Fates obey. 
With sighs and tears I leave my native shore, 
And empty fields, where Ilium stood before. 
My sire, my son, our less and greater gods, 
All sail at once, and cleave the briny floods. 
"Against our coast appears a spacious land, 
Which once the fierce Lycurgus did command, 
(Thracia the name- the people bold in war; 
Vast are their fields, and tillage is their care,) 
A hospitable realm while Fate was kind, 
With Troy in friendship and religion join'd. 
I land; with luckless omens then adore 
Their gods, and draw a line along the shore; 
I lay the deep foundations of a wall, 
And Aenos, nam'd from me, the city call. 
To Dionaean Venus vows are paid, 
And all the pow'rs that rising labors aid; 
A bull on Jove's imperial altar laid. 
Not far, a rising hillock stood in view; 
Sharp myrtles on the sides, and cornels grew. 
There, while I went to crop the sylvan scenes, 
And shade our altar with their leafy greens, 
I pull'd a plant- with horror I relate 
A prodigy so strange and full of fate. 
The rooted fibers rose, and from the wound 
Black bloody drops distill'd upon the ground. 
Mute and amaz'd, my hair with terror stood; 
Fear shrunk my sinews, and congeal'd my blood. 
Mann'd once again, another plant I try: 
That other gush'd with the same sanguine dye. 
Then, fearing guilt for some offense unknown, 
With pray'rs and vows the Dryads I atone, 
With all the sisters of the woods, and most 
The God of Arms, who rules the Thracian coast, 
That they, or he, these omens would avert, 
Release our fears, and better signs impart. 
Clear'd, as I thought, and fully fix'd at length 
To learn the cause, I tugged with all my strength: 
I bent my knees against the ground; once more 
The violated myrtle ran with gore. 
Scarce dare I tell the sequel: from the womb 
Of wounded earth, and caverns of the tomb, 
A groan, as of a troubled ghost, renew'd 
My fright, and then these dreadful words ensued: 
'Why dost thou thus my buried body rend? 
O spare the corpse of thy unhappy friend! 
Spare to pollute thy pious hands with blood: 
The tears distil not from the wounded wood; 
But ev'ry drop this living tree contains 
Is kindred blood, and ran in Trojan veins. 
O fly from this unhospitable shore, 
Warn'd by my fate; for I am Polydore! 
Here loads of lances, in my blood embrued, 
Again shoot upward, by my blood renew'd.' 
"My falt'ring tongue and shiv'ring limbs declare 
My horror, and in bristles rose my hair. 
When Troy with Grecian arms was closely pent, 
Old Priam, fearful of the war's event, 
This hapless Polydore to Thracia sent: 
Loaded with gold, he sent his darling, far 
From noise and tumults, and destructive war, 
Committed to the faithless tyrant's care; 
Who, when he saw the pow'r of Troy decline, 
Forsook the weaker, with the strong to join; 
Broke ev'ry bond of nature and of truth, 
And murder'd, for his wealth, the royal youth. 
O sacred hunger of pernicious gold! 
What bands of faith can impious lucre hold? 
Now, when my soul had shaken off her fears, 
I call my father and the Trojan peers; 
Relate the prodigies of Heav'n, require 
What he commands, and their advice desire. 
All vote to leave that execrable shore, 
Polluted with the blood of Polydore; 
But, ere we sail, his fun'ral rites prepare, 
Then, to his ghost, a tomb and altars rear. 
In mournful pomp the matrons walk the round, 
With baleful cypress and blue fillets crown'd, 
With eyes dejected, and with hair unbound. 
Then bowls of tepid milk and blood we pour, 
And thrice invoke the soul of Polydore. 
"Now, when the raging storms no longer reign, 
But southern gales invite us to the main, 
We launch our vessels, with a prosp'rous wind, 
And leave the cities and the shores behind. 
"An island in th' Aegaean main appears; 
Neptune and wat'ry Doris claim it theirs. 
It floated once, till Phoebus fix'd the sides 
To rooted earth, and now it braves the tides. 
Here, borne by friendly winds, we come ashore, 
With needful ease our weary limbs restore, 
And the Sun's temple and his town adore. 
"Anius, the priest and king, with laurel crown'd, 
His hoary locks with purple fillets bound, 
Who saw my sire the Delian shore ascend, 
Came forth with eager haste to meet his friend; 
Invites him to his palace; and, in sign 
Of ancient love, their plighted hands they join. 
Then to the temple of the god I went, 
And thus, before the shrine, my vows present: 
'Give, O Thymbraeus, give a resting place 
To the sad relics of the Trojan race; 
A seat secure, a region of their own, 
A lasting empire, and a happier town. 
Where shall we fix? where shall our labors end? 
Whom shall we follow, and what fate attend? 
Let not my pray'rs a doubtful answer find; 
But in clear auguries unveil thy mind.' 
Scarce had I said: he shook the holy ground, 
The laurels, and the lofty hills around; 
And from the tripos rush'd a bellowing sound. 
Prostrate we fell; confess'd the present god, 
Who gave this answer from his dark abode: 
'Undaunted youths, go, seek that mother earth 
From which your ancestors derive their birth. 
The soil that sent you forth, her ancient race 
In her old bosom shall again embrace. 
Thro' the wide world th' Aeneian house shall reign, 
And children's children shall the crown sustain.' 
Thus Phoebus did our future fates disclose: 
A mighty tumult, mix'd with joy, arose. 
"All are concern'd to know what place the god 
Assign'd, and where determin'd our abode. 
My father, long revolving in his mind 
The race and lineage of the Trojan kind, 
Thus answer'd their demands: 'Ye princes, hear 
Your pleasing fortune, and dispel your fear. 
The fruitful isle of Crete, well known to fame, 
Sacred of old to Jove's imperial name, 
In the mid ocean lies, with large command, 
And on its plains a hundred cities stand. 
Another Ida rises there, and we 
From thence derive our Trojan ancestry. 
From thence, as 't is divulg'd by certain fame, 
To the Rhoetean shores old Teucrus came; 
There fix'd, and there the seat of empire chose, 
Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow'rs arose. 
In humble vales they built their soft abodes, 
Till Cybele, the mother of the gods, 
With tinkling cymbals charm'd th' Idaean woods, 
She secret rites and ceremonies taught, 
And to the yoke the savage lions brought. 
Let us the land which Heav'n appoints, explore; 
Appease the winds, and seek the Gnossian shore. 
If Jove assists the passage of our fleet, 
The third propitious dawn discovers Crete.' 
Thus having said, the sacrifices, laid 
On smoking altars, to the gods he paid: 
A bull, to Neptune an oblation due, 
Another bull to bright Apollo slew; 
A milk-white ewe, the western winds to please, 
And one coal-black, to calm the stormy seas. 
Ere this, a flying rumor had been spread 
That fierce Idomeneus from Crete was fled, 
Expell'd and exil'd; that the coast was free 
From foreign or domestic enemy. 
"We leave the Delian ports, and put to sea; 
By Naxos, fam'd for vintage, make our way; 
Then green Donysa pass; and sail in sight 
Of Paros' isle, with marble quarries white. 
We pass the scatter'd isles of Cyclades, 
That, scarce distinguish'd, seem to stud the seas. 
The shouts of sailors double near the shores; 
They stretch their canvas, and they ply their oars. 
'All hands aloft! for Crete! for Crete!' they cry, 
And swiftly thro' the foamy billows fly. 
Full on the promis'd land at length we bore, 
With joy descending on the Cretan shore. 
With eager haste a rising town I frame, 
Which from the Trojan Pergamus I name: 
The name itself was grateful; I exhort 
To found their houses, and erect a fort. 
Our ships are haul'd upon the yellow strand; 
The youth begin to till the labor'd land; 
And I myself new marriages promote, 
Give laws, and dwellings I divide by lot; 
When rising vapors choke the wholesome air, 
And blasts of noisome winds corrupt the year; 
The trees devouring caterpillars burn; 
Parch'd was the grass, and blighted was the corn: 
Nor 'scape the beasts; for Sirius, from on high, 
With pestilential heat infects the sky: 
My men- some fall, the rest in fevers fry. 
Again my father bids me seek the shore 
Of sacred Delos, and the god implore, 
To learn what end of woes we might expect, 
And to what clime our weary course direct. 
"'T was night, when ev'ry creature, void of cares, 
The common gift of balmy slumber shares: 
The statues of my gods (for such they seem'd), 
Those gods whom I from flaming Troy redeem'd, 
Before me stood, majestically bright, 
Full in the beams of Phoebe's ent'ring light. 
Then thus they spoke, and eas'd my troubled mind: 
'What from the Delian god thou go'st to find, 
He tells thee here, and sends us to relate. 
Those pow'rs are we, companions of thy fate, 
Who from the burning town by thee were brought, 
Thy fortune follow'd, and thy safety wrought. 
Thro' seas and lands as we thy steps attend, 
So shall our care thy glorious race befriend. 
An ample realm for thee thy fates ordain, 
A town that o'er the conquer'd world shall reign. 
Thou, mighty walls for mighty nations build; 
Nor let thy weary mind to labors yield: 
But change thy seat; for not the Delian god, 
Nor we, have giv'n thee Crete for our abode. 
A land there is, Hesperia call'd of old, 
(The soil is fruitful, and the natives bold- 
Th' Oenotrians held it once,) by later fame 
Now call'd Italia, from the leader's name. 
lasius there and Dardanus were born; 
From thence we came, and thither must return. 
Rise, and thy sire with these glad tidings greet. 
Search Italy; for Jove denies thee Crete.' 
"Astonish'd at their voices and their sight, 
(Nor were they dreams, but visions of the night; 
I saw, I knew their faces, and descried, 
In perfect view, their hair with fillets tied;) 
I started from my couch; a clammy sweat 
On all my limbs and shiv'ring body sate. 
To heav'n I lift my hands with pious haste, 
And sacred incense in the flames I cast. 
Thus to the gods their perfect honors done, 
More cheerful, to my good old sire I run, 
And tell the pleasing news. In little space 
He found his error of the double race; 
Not, as before he deem'd, deriv'd from Crete; 
No more deluded by the doubtful seat: 
Then said: 'O son, turmoil'd in Trojan fate! 
Such things as these Cassandra did relate. 
This day revives within my mind what she 
Foretold of Troy renew'd in Italy, 
And Latian lands; but who could then have thought 
That Phrygian gods to Latium should be brought, 
Or who believ'd what mad Cassandra taught? 
Now let us go where Phoebus leads the way.' 
"He said; and we with glad consent obey, 
Forsake the seat, and, leaving few behind, 
We spread our sails before the willing wind. 
Now from the sight of land our galleys move, 
With only seas around and skies above; 
When o'er our heads descends a burst of rain, 
And night with sable clouds involves the main; 
The ruffling winds the foamy billows raise; 
The scatter'd fleet is forc'd to sev'ral ways; 
The face of heav'n is ravish'd from our eyes, 
And in redoubled peals the roaring thunder flies. 
Cast from our course, we wander in the dark. 
No stars to guide, no point of land to mark. 
Ev'n Palinurus no distinction found 
Betwixt the night and day; such darkness reign'd around.

Three starless nights the doubtful navy strays, 
Without distinction, and three sunless days; 
The fourth renews the light, and, from our shrouds, 
We view a rising land, like distant clouds; 
The mountain-tops confirm the pleasing sight, 
And curling smoke ascending from their height. 
The canvas falls; their oars the sailors ply; 
From the rude strokes the whirling waters fly. 
At length I land upon the Strophades, 
Safe from the danger of the stormy seas. 
Those isles are compass'd by th' Ionian main, 
The dire abode where the foul Harpies reign, 
Forc'd by the winged warriors to repair 
To their old homes, and leave their costly fare. 
Monsters more fierce offended Heav'n ne'er sent 
From hell's abyss, for human punishment: 
With virgin faces, but with wombs obscene, 
Foul paunches, and with ordure still unclean; 
With claws for hands, and looks for ever lean. 
"We landed at the port, and soon beheld 
Fat herds of oxen graze the flow'ry field, 
And wanton goats without a keeper stray'd. 
With weapons we the welcome prey invade, 
Then call the gods for partners of our feast, 
And Jove himself, the chief invited guest. 
We spread the tables on the greensward ground; 
We feed with hunger, and the bowls go round; 
When from the mountain-tops, with hideous cry, 
And clatt'ring wings, the hungry Harpies fly; 
They snatch the meat, defiling all they find, 
And, parting, leave a loathsome stench behind. 
Close by a hollow rock, again we sit, 
New dress the dinner, and the beds refit, 
Secure from sight, beneath a pleasing shade, 
Where tufted trees a native arbor made. 
Again the holy fires on altars burn; 
And once again the rav'nous birds return, 
Or from the dark recesses where they lie, 
Or from another quarter of the sky; 
With filthy claws their odious meal repeat, 
And mix their loathsome ordures with their meat. 
I bid my friends for vengeance then prepare, 
And with the hellish nation wage the war. 
They, as commanded, for the fight provide, 
And in the grass their glitt'ring weapons hide; 
Then, when along the crooked shore we hear 
Their clatt'ring wings, and saw the foes appear, 
Misenus sounds a charge: we take th' alarm, 
And our strong hands with swords and bucklers arm. 
In this new kind of combat all employ 
Their utmost force, the monsters to destroy. 
In vain- the fated skin is proof to wounds; 
And from their plumes the shining sword rebounds. 
At length rebuff'd, they leave their mangled prey, 
And their stretch'd pinions to the skies display. 
Yet one remain'd- the messenger of Fate: 
High on a craggy cliff Celaeno sate, 
And thus her dismal errand did relate: 
'What! not contented with our oxen slain, 
Dare you with Heav'n an impious war maintain, 
And drive the Harpies from their native reign? 
Heed therefore what I say; and keep in mind 
What Jove decrees, what Phoebus has design'd, 
And I, the Furies' queen, from both relate- 
You seek th' Italian shores, foredoom'd by fate: 
Th' Italian shores are granted you to find, 
And a safe passage to the port assign'd. 
But know, that ere your promis'd walls you build, 
My curses shall severely be fulfill'd. 
Fierce famine is your lot for this misdeed, 
Reduc'd to grind the plates on which you feed.' 
She said, and to the neighb'ring forest flew. 
Our courage fails us, and our fears renew. 
Hopeless to win by war, to pray'rs we fall, 
And on th' offended Harpies humbly call, 
And whether gods or birds obscene they were, 
Our vows for pardon and for peace prefer. 
But old Anchises, off'ring sacrifice, 
And lifting up to heav'n his hands and eyes, 
Ador'd the greater gods: 'Avert,' said he, 
'These omens; render vain this prophecy, 
And from th' impending curse a pious people free!' 
"Thus having said, he bids us put to sea; 
We loose from shore our haulsers, and obey, 
And soon with swelling sails pursue the wat'ry way. 
Amidst our course, Zacynthian woods appear; 
And next by rocky Neritos we steer: 
We fly from Ithaca's detested shore, 
And curse the land which dire Ulysses bore. 
At length Leucate's cloudy top appears, 
And the Sun's temple, which the sailor fears. 
Resolv'd to breathe a while from labor past, 
Our crooked anchors from the prow we cast, 
And joyful to the little city haste. 
Here, safe beyond our hopes, our vows we pay 
To Jove, the guide and patron of our way. 
The customs of our country we pursue, 
And Trojan games on Actian shores renew. 
Our youth their naked limbs besmear with oil, 
And exercise the wrastlers' noble toil; 
Pleas'd to have sail'd so long before the wind, 
And left so many Grecian towns behind. 
The sun had now fulfill'd his annual course, 
And Boreas on the seas display'd his force: 
I fix'd upon the temple's lofty door 
The brazen shield which vanquish'd Abas bore; 
The verse beneath my name and action speaks: 
'These arms Aeneas took from conqu'ring Greeks.' 
Then I command to weigh; the seamen ply 
Their sweeping oars; the smoking billows fly. 
The sight of high Phaeacia soon we lost, 
And skimm'd along Epirus' rocky coast. 
"Then to Chaonia's port our course we bend, 
And, landed, to Buthrotus' heights ascend. 
Here wondrous things were loudly blaz'd fame: 
How Helenus reviv'd the Trojan name, 
And reign'd in Greece; that Priam's captive son 
Succeeded Pyrrhus in his bed and throne; 
And fair Andromache, restor'd by fate, 
Once more was happy in a Trojan mate. 
I leave my galleys riding in the port, 
And long to see the new Dardanian court. 
By chance, the mournful queen, before the gate, 
Then solemniz'd her former husband's fate. 
Green altars, rais'd of turf, with gifts she crown'd, 
And sacred priests in order stand around, 
And thrice the name of hapless Hector sound. 
The grove itself resembles Ida's wood; 
And Simois seem'd the well-dissembled flood. 
But when at nearer distance she beheld 
My shining armor and my Trojan shield, 
Astonish'd at the sight, the vital heat 
Forsakes her limbs; her veins no longer beat: 
She faints, she falls, and scarce recov'ring strength, 
Thus, with a falt'ring tongue, she speaks at length: 
"'Are you alive, O goddess-born ?' she said, 
'Or if a ghost, then where is Hector's shade?' 
At this, she cast a loud and frightful cry. 
With broken words I made this brief reply: 
'All of me that remains appears in sight; 
I live, if living be to loathe the light. 
No phantom; but I drag a wretched life, 
My fate resembling that of Hector's wife. 
What have you suffer'd since you lost your lord? 
By what strange blessing are you now restor'd? 
Still are you Hector's? or is Hector fled, 
And his remembrance lost in Pyrrhus' bed?' 
With eyes dejected, in a lowly tone, 
After a modest pause she thus begun: 
"'O only happy maid of Priam's race, 
Whom death deliver'd from the foes' embrace! 
Commanded on Achilles' tomb to die, 
Not forc'd, like us, to hard captivity, 
Or in a haughty master's arms to lie. 
In Grecian ships unhappy we were borne, 
Endur'd the victor's lust, sustain'd the scorn: 
Thus I submitted to the lawless pride 
Of Pyrrhus, more a handmaid than a bride. 
Cloy'd with possession, he forsook my bed, 
And Helen's lovely daughter sought to wed; 
Then me to Trojan Helenus resign'd, 
And his two slaves in equal marriage join'd; 
Till young Orestes, pierc'd with deep despair, 
And longing to redeem the promis'd fair, 
Before Apollo's altar slew the ravisher. 
By Pyrrhus' death the kingdom we regain'd: 
At least one half with Helenus remain'd. 
Our part, from Chaon, he Chaonia calls, 
And names from Pergamus his rising walls. 
But you, what fates have landed on our coast? 
What gods have sent you, or what storms have toss'd? 
Does young Ascanius life and health enjoy, 
Sav'd from the ruins of unhappy Troy? 
O tell me how his mother's loss he bears, 
What hopes are promis'd from his blooming years, 
How much of Hector in his face appears?' 
She spoke; and mix'd her speech with mournful cries, 
And fruitless tears came trickling from her eyes. 
"At length her lord descends upon the plain, 
In pomp, attended with a num'rous train; 
Receives his friends, and to the city leads, 
And tears of joy amidst his welcome sheds. 
Proceeding on, another Troy I see, 
Or, in less compass, Troy's epitome. 
A riv'let by the name of Xanthus ran, 
And I embrace the Scaean gate again. 
My friends in porticoes were entertain'd, 
And feasts and pleasures thro' the city reign'd. 
The tables fill'd the spacious hall around, 
And golden bowls with sparkling wine were crown'd. 
Two days we pass'd in mirth, till friendly gales, 
Blown from the supplied our swelling sails. 
Then to the royal seer I thus began: 
'O thou, who know'st, beyond the reach of man, 
The laws of heav'n, and what the stars decree; 
Whom Phoebus taught unerring prophecy, 
From his own tripod, and his holy tree; 
Skill'd in the wing'd inhabitants of air, 
What auspices their notes and flights declare: 
O say- for all religious rites portend 
A happy voyage, and a prosp'rous end; 
And ev'ry power and omen of the sky 
Direct my course for destin'd Italy; 
But only dire Celaeno, from the gods, 
A dismal famine fatally forebodes- 
O say what dangers I am first to shun, 
What toils vanquish, and what course to run.' 
"The prophet first with sacrifice adores 
The greater gods; their pardon then implores; 
Unbinds the fillet from his holy head; 
To Phoebus, next, my trembling steps he led, 
Full of religious doubts and awful dread. 
Then, with his god possess'd, before the shrine, 
These words proceeded from his mouth divine: 
'O goddess-born, (for Heav'n's appointed will, 
With greater auspices of good than ill, 
Foreshows thy voyage, and thy course directs; 
Thy fates conspire, and Jove himself protects,) 
Of many things some few I shall explain, 
Teach thee to shun the dangers of the main, 
And how at length the promis'd shore to gain. 
The rest the fates from Helenus conceal, 
And Juno's angry pow'r forbids to tell. 
First, then, that happy shore, that seems so nigh, 
Will far from your deluded wishes fly; 
Long tracts of seas divide your hopes from Italy: 
For you must cruise along Sicilian shores, 
And stem the currents with your struggling oars; 
Then round th' Italian coast your navy steer; 
And, after this, to Circe's island veer; 
And, last, before your new foundations rise, 
Must pass the Stygian lake, and view the nether skies. 
Now mark the signs of future ease and rest, 
And bear them safely treasur'd in thy breast. 
When, in the shady shelter of a wood, 
And near the margin of a gentle flood, 
Thou shalt behold a sow upon the ground, 
With thirty sucking young encompass'd round; 
The dam and offspring white as falling snow- 
These on thy city shall their name bestow, 
And there shall end thy labors and thy woe. 
Nor let the threaten'd famine fright thy mind, 
For Phoebus will assist, and Fate the way will find. 
Let not thy course to that ill coast be bent, 
Which fronts from far th' Epirian continent: 
Those parts are all by Grecian foes possess'd; 
The salvage Locrians here the shores infest; 
There fierce Idomeneus his city builds, 
And guards with arms the Salentinian fields; 
And on the mountain's brow Petilia stands, 
Which Philoctetes with his troops commands. 
Ev'n when thy fleet is landed on the shore, 
And priests with holy vows the gods adore, 
Then with a purple veil involve your eyes, 
Lest hostile faces blast the sacrifice. 
These rites and customs to the rest commend, 
That to your pious race they may descend. 

"'When, parted hence, the wind, that ready waits 
For Sicily, shall bear you to the straits 
Where proud Pelorus opes a wider way, 
Tack to the larboard, and stand off to sea: 
Veer starboard sea and land. Th' Italian shore 
And fair Sicilia's coast were one, before 
An earthquake caus'd the flaw: the roaring tides 
The passage broke that land from land divides; 
And where the lands retir'd, the rushing ocean rides. 
Distinguish'd by the straits, on either hand, 
Now rising cities in long order stand, 
And fruitful fields: so much can time invade 
The mold'ring work that beauteous Nature made. 
Far on the right, her dogs foul Scylla hides: 
Charybdis roaring on the left presides, 
And in her greedy whirlpool sucks the tides; 
Then spouts them from below: with fury driv'n, 
The waves mount up and wash the face of heav'n. 
But Scylla from her den, with open jaws, 
The sinking vessel in her eddy draws, 
Then dashes on the rocks. A human face, 
And virgin bosom, hides her tail's disgrace: 
Her parts obscene below the waves descend, 
With dogs inclos'd, and in a dolphin end. 
'T is safer, then, to bear aloof to sea, 
And coast Pachynus, tho' with more delay, 
Than once to view misshapen Scylla near, 
And the loud yell of wat'ry wolves to hear. 
"'Besides, if faith to Helenus be due, 
And if prophetic Phoebus tell me true, 
Do not this precept of your friend forget, 
Which therefore more than once I must repeat: 
Above the rest, great Juno's name adore; 
Pay vows to Juno; Juno's aid implore. 
Let gifts be to the mighty queen design'd, 
And mollify with pray'rs her haughty mind. 
Thus, at the length, your passage shall be free, 
And you shall safe descend on Italy. 
Arriv'd at Cumae, when you view the flood 
Of black Avernus, and the sounding wood, 
The mad prophetic Sibyl you shall find, 
Dark in a cave, and on a rock reclin'd. 
She sings the fates, and, in her frantic fits, 
The notes and names, inscrib'd, to leafs commits. 
What she commits to leafs, in order laid, 
Before the cavern's entrance are display'd: 
Unmov'd they lie; but, if a blast of wind 
Without, or vapors issue from behind, 
The leafs are borne aloft in liquid air, 
And she resumes no more her museful care, 
Nor gathers from the rocks her scatter'd verse, 
Nor sets in order what the winds disperse. 
Thus, many not succeeding, most upbraid 
The madness of the visionary maid, 
And with loud curses leave the mystic shade. 
"'Think it not loss of time a while to stay, 
Tho' thy companions chide thy long delay; 
Tho' summon'd to the seas, tho' pleasing gales 
Invite thy course, and stretch thy swelling sails: 
But beg the sacred priestess to relate 
With willing words, and not to write thy fate. 
The fierce Italian people she will show, 
And all thy wars, and all thy future woe, 
And what thou may'st avoid, and what must undergo. 
She shall direct thy course, instruct thy mind, 
And teach thee how the happy shores to find. 
This is what Heav'n allows me to relate: 
Now part in peace; pursue thy better fate, 
And raise, by strength of arms, the Trojan state.' 
"This when the priest with friendly voice declar'd, 
He gave me license, and rich gifts prepar'd: 
Bounteous of treasure, he supplied my want 
With heavy gold, and polish'd elephant; 
Then Dodonaean caldrons put on board, 
And ev'ry ship with sums of silver stor'd. 
A trusty coat of mail to me he sent, 
Thrice chain'd with gold, for use and ornament; 
The helm of Pyrrhus added to the rest, 
That flourish'd with a plume and waving crest. 
Nor was my sire forgotten, nor my friends; 
And large recruits he to my navy sends: 
Men, horses, captains, arms, and warlike stores; 
Supplies new pilots, and new sweeping oars. 
Meantime, my sire commands to hoist our sails, 
Lest we should lose the first auspicious gales. 
"The prophet bless'd the parting crew, and last, 
With words like these, his ancient friend embrac'd: 
'Old happy man, the care of gods above, 
Whom heav'nly Venus honor'd with her love, 
And twice preserv'd thy life, when Troy was lost, 
Behold from far the wish'd Ausonian coast: 
There land; but take a larger compass round, 
For that before is all forbidden ground. 
The shore that Phoebus has design'd for you, 
At farther distance lies, conceal'd from view. 
Go happy hence, and seek your new abodes, 
Blest in a son, and favor'd by the gods: 
For I with useless words prolong your stay, 
When southern gales have summon'd you away.' 
"Nor less the queen our parting thence deplor'd, 
Nor was less bounteous than her Trojan lord. 
A noble present to my son she brought, 
A robe with flow'rs on golden tissue wrought, 
A phrygian vest; and loads with gifts beside 
Of precious texture, and of Asian pride. 
'Accept,' she said, 'these monuments of love, 
Which in my youth with happier hands I wove: 
Regard these trifles for the giver's sake; 
'T is the last present Hector's wife can make. 
Thou call'st my lost Astyanax to mind; 
In thee his features and his form I find: 
His eyes so sparkled with a lively flame; 
Such were his motions; such was all his frame; 
And ah! had Heav'n so pleas'd, his years had been the same.'

"With tears I took my last adieu, and said: 
'Your fortune, happy pair, already made, 
Leaves you no farther wish. My diff'rent state, 
Avoiding one, incurs another fate. 
To you a quiet seat the gods allow: 
You have no shores to search, no seas to plow, 
Nor fields of flying Italy to chase: 
(Deluding visions, and a vain embrace!) 
You see another Simois, and enjoy 
The labor of your hands, another Troy, 
With better auspice than her ancient tow'rs, 
And less obnoxious to the Grecian pow'rs. 
If e'er the gods, whom I with vows adore, 
Conduct my steps to Tiber's happy shore; 
If ever I ascend the Latian throne, 
And build a city I may call my own; 
As both of us our birth from Troy derive, 
So let our kindred lines in concord live, 
And both in acts of equal friendship strive. 
Our fortunes, good or bad, shall be the same: 
The double Troy shall differ but in name; 
That what we now begin may never end, 
But long to late posterity descend.' 
"Near the Ceraunian rocks our course we bore; 
The shortest passage to th' Italian shore. 
Now had the sun withdrawn his radiant light, 
And hills were hid in dusky shades of night: 
We land, and, on the bosom Of the ground, 
A safe retreat and a bare lodging found. 
Close by the shore we lay; the sailors keep 
Their watches, and the rest securely sleep. 
The night, proceeding on with silent pace, 
Stood in her noon, and view'd with equal face 
Her steepy rise and her declining race. 
Then wakeful Palinurus rose, to spy 
The face of heav'n, and the nocturnal sky; 
And listen'd ev'ry breath of air to try; 
Observes the stars, and notes their sliding course, 
The Pleiads, Hyads, and their wat'ry force; 
And both the Bears is careful to behold, 
And bright Orion, arm'd with burnish'd gold. 
Then, when he saw no threat'ning tempest nigh, 
But a sure promise of a settled sky, 
He gave the sign to weigh; we break our sleep, 
Forsake the pleasing shore, and plow the deep. 
"And now the rising morn with rosy light 
Adorns the skies, and puts the stars to flight; 
When we from far, like bluish mists, descry 
The hills, and then the plains, of Italy. 
Achates first pronounc'd the joyful sound; 
Then, 'Italy!' the cheerful crew rebound. 
My sire Anchises crown'd a cup with wine, 
And, off'ring, thus implor'd the pow'rs divine: 
'Ye gods, presiding over lands and seas, 
And you who raging winds and waves appease, 
Breathe on our swelling sails a prosp'rous wind, 
And smooth our passage to the port assign'd!' 
The gentle gales their flagging force renew, 
And now the happy harbor is in view. 
Minerva's temple then salutes our sight, 
Plac'd, as a landmark, on the mountain's height. 
We furl our sails, and turn the prows to shore; 
The curling waters round the galleys roar. 
The land lies open to the raging east, 
Then, bending like a bow, with rocks compress'd, 
Shuts out the storms; the winds and waves complain, 
And vent their malice on the cliffs in vain. 
The port lies hid within; on either side 
Two tow'ring rocks the narrow mouth divide. 
The temple, which aloft we view'd before, 
To distance flies, and seems to shun the shore. 
Scarce landed, the first omens I beheld 
Were four white steeds that cropp'd the flow'ry field. 
'War, war is threaten'd from this foreign ground,' 
My father cried, 'where warlike steeds are found. 
Yet, since reclaim'd to chariots they submit, 
And bend to stubborn yokes, and champ the bit, 
Peace may succeed to war.' Our way we bend 
To Pallas, and the sacred hill ascend; 
There prostrate to the fierce virago pray, 
Whose temple was the landmark of our way. 
Each with a Phrygian mantle veil'd his head, 
And all commands of Helenus obey'd, 
And pious rites to Grecian Juno paid. 
These dues perform'd, we stretch our sails, and stand 
To sea, forsaking that suspected land. 
"From hence Tarentum's bay appears in view, 
For Hercules renown'd, if fame be true. 
Just opposite, Lacinian Juno stands; 
Caulonian tow'rs, and Scylacaean strands, 
For shipwrecks fear'd. Mount Aetna thence we spy, 
Known by the smoky flames which cloud the sky. 
Far off we hear the waves with surly sound 
Invade the rocks, the rocks their groans rebound. 
The billows break upon the sounding strand, 
And roll the rising tide, impure with sand. 
Then thus Anchises, in experience old: 
''T is that Charybdis which the seer foretold, 
And those the promis'd rocks! Bear off to sea!' 
With haste the frighted mariners obey. 
First Palinurus to the larboard veer'd; 
Then all the fleet by his example steer'd. 
To heav'n aloft on ridgy waves we ride, 
Then down to hell descend, when they divide; 
And thrice our galleys knock'd the stony ground, 
And thrice the hollow rocks return'd the sound, 
And thrice we saw the stars, that stood with dews around.

The flagging winds forsook us, with the sun; 
And, wearied, on Cyclopian shores we run. 
The port capacious, and secure from wind, 
Is to the foot of thund'ring Aetna join'd. 
By turns a pitchy cloud she rolls on high; 
By turns hot embers from her entrails fly, 
And flakes of mounting flames, that lick the sky. 
Oft from her bowels massy rocks are thrown, 
And, shiver'd by the force, come piecemeal down. 
Oft liquid lakes of burning sulphur flow, 
Fed from the fiery springs that boil below. 
Enceladus, they say, transfix'd by Jove, 
With blasted limbs came tumbling from above; 
And, where he fell, th' avenging father drew 
This flaming hill, and on his body threw. 
As often as he turns his weary sides, 
He shakes the solid isle, and smoke the heavens hides. 
In shady woods we pass the tedious night, 
Where bellowing sounds and groans our souls affright, 
Of which no cause is offer'd to the sight; 
For not one star was kindled in the sky, 
Nor could the moon her borrow'd light supply; 
For misty clouds involv'd the firmament, 
The stars were muffled, and the moon was pent. 
"Scarce had the rising sun the day reveal'd, 
Scarce had his heat the pearly dews dispell'd, 
When from the woods there bolts, before our sight, 
Somewhat betwixt a mortal and a sprite, 
So thin, so ghastly meager, and so wan, 
So bare of flesh, he scarce resembled man. 
This thing, all tatter'd, seem'd from far t' implore 
Our pious aid, and pointed to the shore. 
We look behind, then view his shaggy beard; 
His clothes were tagg'd with thorns, and filth his limbs besmear'd;

The rest, in mien, in habit, and in face, 
Appear'd a Greek, and such indeed he was. 
He cast on us, from far, a frightful view, 
Whom soon for Trojans and for foes he knew; 
Stood still, and paus'd; then all at once began 
To stretch his limbs, and trembled as he ran. 
Soon as approach'd, upon his knees he falls, 
And thus with tears and sighs for pity calls: 
'Now, by the pow'rs above, and what we share 
From Nature's common gift, this vital air, 
O Trojans, take me hence! I beg no more; 
But bear me far from this unhappy shore. 
'T is true, I am a Greek, and farther own, 
Among your foes besieg'd th' imperial town. 
For such demerits if my death be due, 
No more for this abandon'd life I sue; 
This only favor let my tears obtain, 
To throw me headlong in the rapid main: 
Since nothing more than death my crime demands, 
I die content, to die by human hands.' 
He said, and on his knees my knees embrac'd: 
I bade him boldly tell his fortune past, 
His present state, his lineage, and his name, 
Th' occasion of his fears, and whence he came. 
The good Anchises rais'd him with his hand; 
Who, thus encourag'd, answer'd our demand: 
'From Ithaca, my native soil, I came 
To Troy; and Achaemenides my name. 
Me my poor father with Ulysses sent; 
(O had I stay'd, with poverty content!) 
But, fearful for themselves, my countrymen 
Left me forsaken in the Cyclops' den. 
The cave, tho' large, was dark; the dismal floor 
Was pav'd with mangled limbs and putrid gore. 
Our monstrous host, of more than human size, 
Erects his head, and stares within the skies; 
Bellowing his voice, and horrid is his hue. 
Ye gods, remove this plague from mortal view! 
The joints of slaughter'd wretches are his food; 
And for his wine he quaffs the streaming blood. 
These eyes beheld, when with his spacious hand 
He seiz'd two captives of our Grecian band; 
Stretch'd on his back, he dash'd against the stones 
Their broken bodies, and their crackling bones: 
With spouting blood the purple pavement swims, 
While the dire glutton grinds the trembling limbs. 
"'Not unreveng'd Ulysses bore their fate, 
Nor thoughtless of his own unhappy state; 
For, gorg'd with flesh, and drunk with human wine 
While fast asleep the giant lay supine, 
Snoring aloud, and belching from his maw 
His indigested foam, and morsels raw; 
We pray; we cast the lots, and then surround 
The monstrous body, stretch'd along the ground: 
Each, as he could approach him, lends a hand 
To bore his eyeball with a flaming brand. 
Beneath his frowning forehead lay his eye; 
For only one did the vast frame supply- 
But that a globe so large, his front it fill'd, 
Like the sun's disk or like a Grecian shield. 
The stroke succeeds; and down the pupil bends: 
This vengeance follow'd for our slaughter'd friends. 
But haste, unhappy wretches, haste to fly! 
Your cables cut, and on your oars rely! 
Such, and so vast as Polypheme appears, 
A hundred more this hated island bears: 
Like him, in caves they shut their woolly sheep; 
Like him, their herds on tops of mountains keep; 
Like him, with mighty strides, they stalk from steep to steep

And now three moons their sharpen'd horns renew, 
Since thus, in woods and wilds, obscure from view, 
I drag my loathsome days with mortal fright, 
And in deserted caverns lodge by night; 
Oft from the rocks a dreadful prospect see 
Of the huge Cyclops, like a walking tree: 
From far I hear his thund'ring voice resound, 
And trampling feet that shake the solid ground. 
Cornels and salvage berries of the wood, 
And roots and herbs, have been my meager food. 
While all around my longing eyes I cast, 
I saw your happy ships appear at last. 
On those I fix'd my hopes, to these I run; 
'T is all I ask, this cruel race to shun; 
What other death you please, yourselves bestow.' 
"Scarce had he said, when on the mountain's brow 
We saw the giant shepherd stalk before 
His following flock, and leading to the shore: 
A monstrous bulk, deform'd, depriv'd of sight; 
His staff a trunk of pine, to guide his steps aright. 
His pond'rous whistle from his neck descends; 
His woolly care their pensive lord attends: 
This only solace his hard fortune sends. 
Soon as he reach'd the shore and touch'd the waves, 
From his bor'd eye the gutt'ring blood he laves: 
He gnash'd his teeth, and groan'd; thro' seas he strides,

And scarce the topmost billows touch'd his sides. 
"Seiz'd with a sudden fear, we run to sea, 
The cables cut, and silent haste away; 
The well-deserving stranger entertain; 
Then, buckling to the work, our oars divide the main. 
The giant harken'd to the dashing sound: 
But, when our vessels out of reach he found, 
He strided onward, and in vain essay'd 
Th' Ionian deep, and durst no farther wade. 
With that he roar'd aloud: the dreadful cry 
Shakes earth, and air, and seas; the billows fly 
Before the bellowing noise to distant Italy. 
The neigh'ring Aetna trembling all around, 
The winding caverns echo to the sound. 
His brother Cyclops hear the yelling roar, 
And, rushing down the mountains, crowd the shore. 
We saw their stern distorted looks, from far, 
And one-eyed glance, that vainly threaten'd war: 
A dreadful council, with their heads on high; 
(The misty clouds about their foreheads fly;) 
Not yielding to the tow'ring tree of Jove, 
Or tallest cypress of Diana's grove. 
New pangs of mortal fear our minds assail; 
We tug at ev'ry oar, and hoist up ev'ry sail, 
And take th' advantage of the friendly gale. 
Forewarn'd by Helenus, we strive to shun 
Charybdis' gulf, nor dare to Scylla run. 
An equal fate on either side appears: 
We, tacking to the left, are free from fears; 
For, from Pelorus' point, the North arose, 
And drove us back where swift Pantagias flows. 
His rocky mouth we pass, and make our way 
By Thapsus and Megara's winding bay. 
This passage Achaemenides had shown, 
Tracing the course which he before had run. 
"Right o'er against Plemmyrium's wat'ry strand, 
There lies an isle once call'd th' Ortygian land. 
Alpheus, as old fame reports, has found 
From Greece a secret passage under ground, 
By love to beauteous Arethusa led; 
And, mingling here, they roll in the same sacred bed. 
As Helenus enjoin'd, we next adore 
Diana's name, protectress of the shore. 
With prosp'rous gales we pass the quiet sounds 
Of still Elorus, and his fruitful bounds. 
Then, doubling Cape Pachynus, we survey 
The rocky shore extended to the sea. 
The town of Camarine from far we see, 
And fenny lake, undrain'd by fate's decree. 
In sight of the Geloan fields we pass, 
And the large walls, where mighty Gela was; 
Then Agragas, with lofty summits crown'd, 
Long for the race of warlike steeds renown'd. 
We pass'd Selinus, and the palmy land, 
And widely shun the Lilybaean strand, 
Unsafe, for secret rocks and moving sand. 
At length on shore the weary fleet arriv'd, 
Which Drepanum's unhappy port receiv'd. 
Here, after endless labors, often toss'd 
By raging storms, and driv'n on ev'ry coast, 
My dear, dear father, spent with age, I lost: 
Ease of my cares, and solace of my pain, 
Sav'd thro' a thousand toils, but sav'd in vain 
The prophet, who my future woes reveal'd, 
Yet this, the greatest and the worst, conceal'd; 
And dire Celaeno, whose foreboding skill 
Denounc'd all else, was silent of the ill. 
This my last labor was. Some friendly god 
From thence convey'd us to your blest abode." 
Thus, to the list'ning queen, the royal guest 
His wand'ring course and all his toils express'd; 
And here concluding, he retir'd to rest. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IV

But anxious cares already seiz'd the queen: 
She fed within her veins a flame unseen; 
The hero's valor, acts, and birth inspire 
Her soul with love, and fan the secret fire. 
His words, his looks, imprinted in her heart, 
Improve the passion, and increase the smart. 
Now, when the purple morn had chas'd away 
The dewy shadows, and restor'd the day, 
Her sister first with early care she sought, 
And thus in mournful accents eas'd her thought: 
"My dearest Anna, what new dreams affright 
My lab'ring soul! what visions of the night 
Disturb my quiet, and distract my breast 
With strange ideas of our Trojan guest! 
His worth, his actions, and majestic air, 
A man descended from the gods declare. 
Fear ever argues a degenerate kind; 
His birth is well asserted by his mind. 
Then, what he suffer'd, when by Fate betray'd! 
What brave attempts for falling Troy he made! 
Such were his looks, so gracefully he spoke, 
That, were I not resolv'd against the yoke 
Of hapless marriage, never to be curst 
With second love, so fatal was my first, 
To this one error I might yield again; 
For, since Sichaeus was untimely slain, 
This only man is able to subvert 
The fix'd foundations of my stubborn heart. 
And, to confess my frailty, to my shame, 
Somewhat I find within, if not the same, 
Too like the sparkles of my former flame. 
But first let yawning earth a passage rend, 
And let me thro' the dark abyss descend; 
First let avenging Jove, with flames from high, 
Drive down this body to the nether sky, 
Condemn'd with ghosts in endless night to lie, 
Before I break the plighted faith I gave! 
No! he who had my vows shall ever have; 
For, whom I lov'd on earth, I worship in the grave." 
She said: the tears ran gushing from her eyes, 
And stopp'd her speech. Her sister thus replies: 
"O dearer than the vital air I breathe, 
Will you to grief your blooming years bequeath, 
Condemn'd to waste in woes your lonely life, 
Without the joys of mother or of wife? 
Think you these tears, this pompous train of woe, 
Are known or valued by the ghosts below? 
I grant that, while your sorrows yet were green, 
It well became a woman, and a queen, 
The vows of Tyrian princes to neglect, 
To scorn Hyarbas, and his love reject, 
With all the Libyan lords of mighty name; 
But will you fight against a pleasing flame! 
This little spot of land, which Heav'n bestows, 
On ev'ry side is hemm'd with warlike foes; 
Gaetulian cities here are spread around, 
And fierce Numidians there your frontiers bound; 
Here lies a barren waste of thirsty land, 
And there the Syrtes raise the moving sand; 
Barcaean troops besiege the narrow shore, 
And from the sea Pygmalion threatens more. 
Propitious Heav'n, and gracious Juno, lead 
This wand'ring navy to your needful aid: 
How will your empire spread, your city rise, 
From such a union, and with such allies? 
Implore the favor of the pow'rs above, 
And leave the conduct of the rest to love. 
Continue still your hospitable way, 
And still invent occasions of their stay, 
Till storms and winter winds shall cease to threat, 
And planks and oars repair their shatter'd fleet." 
These words, which from a friend and sister came, 
With ease resolv'd the scruples of her fame, 
And added fury to the kindled flame. 
Inspir'd with hope, the project they pursue; 
On ev'ry altar sacrifice renew: 
A chosen ewe of two years old they pay 
To Ceres, Bacchus, and the God of Day; 
Preferring Juno's pow'r, for Juno ties 
The nuptial knot and makes the marriage joys. 
The beauteous queen before her altar stands, 
And holds the golden goblet in her hands. 
A milk-white heifer she with flow'rs adorns, 
And pours the ruddy wine betwixt her horns; 
And, while the priests with pray'r the gods invoke, 
She feeds their altars with Sabaean smoke, 
With hourly care the sacrifice renews, 
And anxiously the panting entrails views. 
What priestly rites, alas! what pious art, 
What vows avail to cure a bleeding heart! 
A gentle fire she feeds within her veins, 
Where the soft god secure in silence reigns. 
Sick with desire, and seeking him she loves, 
From street to street the raving Dido roves. 
So when the watchful shepherd, from the blind, 
Wounds with a random shaft the careless hind, 
Distracted with her pain she flies the woods, 
Bounds o'er the lawn, and seeks the silent floods, 
With fruitless care; for still the fatal dart 
Sticks in her side, and rankles in her heart. 
And now she leads the Trojan chief along 
The lofty walls, amidst the busy throng; 
Displays her Tyrian wealth, and rising town, 
Which love, without his labor, makes his own. 
This pomp she shows, to tempt her wand'ring guest; 
Her falt'ring tongue forbids to speak the rest. 
When day declines, and feasts renew the night, 
Still on his face she feeds her famish'd sight; 
She longs again to hear the prince relate 
His own adventures and the Trojan fate. 
He tells it o'er and o'er; but still in vain, 
For still she begs to hear it once again. 
The hearer on the speaker's mouth depends, 
And thus the tragic story never ends. 
Then, when they part, when Phoebe's paler light 
Withdraws, and falling stars to sleep invite, 
She last remains, when ev'ry guest is gone, 
Sits on the bed he press'd, and sighs alone; 
Absent, her absent hero sees and hears; 
Or in her bosom young Ascanius bears, 
And seeks the father's image in the child, 
If love by likeness might be so beguil'd. 
Meantime the rising tow'rs are at a stand; 
No labors exercise the youthful band, 
Nor use of arts, nor toils of arms they know; 
The mole is left unfinish'd to the foe; 
The mounds, the works, the walls, neglected lie, 
Short of their promis'd heighth, that seem'd to threat the sky,

But when imperial Juno, from above, 
Saw Dido fetter'd in the chains of love, 
Hot with the venom which her veins inflam'd, 
And by no sense of shame to be reclaim'd, 
With soothing words to Venus she begun: 
"High praises, endless honors, you have won, 
And mighty trophies, with your worthy son! 
Two gods a silly woman have undone! 
Nor am I ignorant, you both suspect 
This rising city, which my hands erect: 
But shall celestial discord never cease? 
'T is better ended in a lasting peace. 
You stand possess'd of all your soul desir'd: 
Poor Dido with consuming love is fir'd. 
Your Trojan with my Tyrian let us join; 
So Dido shall be yours, Aeneas mine: 
One common kingdom, one united line. 
Eliza shall a Dardan lord obey, 
And lofty Carthage for a dow'r convey." 
Then Venus, who her hidden fraud descried, 
Which would the scepter of the world misguide 
To Libyan shores, thus artfully replied: 
"Who, but a fool, would wars with Juno choose, 
And such alliance and such gifts refuse, 
If Fortune with our joint desires comply? 
The doubt is all from Jove and destiny; 
Lest he forbid, with absolute command, 
To mix the people in one common land- 
Or will the Trojan and the Tyrian line 
In lasting leagues and sure succession join? 
But you, the partner of his bed and throne, 
May move his mind; my wishes are your own." 
"Mine," said imperial Juno, "be the care; 
Time urges, now, to perfect this affair: 
Attend my counsel, and the secret share. 
When next the Sun his rising light displays, 
And gilds the world below with purple rays, 
The queen, Aeneas, and the Tyrian court 
Shall to the shady woods, for sylvan game, resort. 
There, while the huntsmen pitch their toils around, 
And cheerful horns from side to side resound, 
A pitchy cloud shall cover all the plain 
With hail, and thunder, and tempestuous rain; 
The fearful train shall take their speedy flight, 
Dispers'd, and all involv'd in gloomy night; 
One cave a grateful shelter shall afford 
To the fair princess and the Trojan lord. 
I will myself the bridal bed prepare, 
If you, to bless the nuptials, will be there: 
So shall their loves be crown'd with due delights, 
And Hymen shall be present at the rites." 
The Queen of Love consents, and closely smiles 
At her vain project, and discover'd wiles. 
The rosy morn was risen from the main, 
And horns and hounds awake the princely train: 
They issue early thro' the city gate, 
Where the more wakeful huntsmen ready wait, 
With nets, and toils, and darts, beside the force 
Of Spartan dogs, and swift Massylian horse. 
The Tyrian peers and officers of state 
For the slow queen in antechambers wait; 
Her lofty courser, in the court below, 
Who his majestic rider seems to know, 
Proud of his purple trappings, paws the ground, 
And champs the golden bit, and spreads the foam around. 
The queen at length appears; on either hand 
The brawny guards in martial order stand. 
A flow'r'd simar with golden fringe she wore, 
And at her back a golden quiver bore; 
Her flowing hair a golden caul restrains, 
A golden clasp the Tyrian robe sustains. 
Then young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace, 
Leads on the Trojan youth to view the chase. 
But far above the rest in beauty shines 
The great Aeneas, the troop he joins; 
Like fair Apollo, when he leaves the frost 
Of wint'ry Xanthus, and the Lycian coast, 
When to his native Delos he resorts, 
Ordains the dances, and renews the sports; 
Where painted Scythians, mix'd with Cretan bands, 
Before the joyful altars join their hands: 
Himself, on Cynthus walking, sees below 
The merry madness of the sacred show. 
Green wreaths of bays his length of hair inclose; 
A golden fillet binds his awful brows; 
His quiver sounds: not less the prince is seen 
In manly presence, or in lofty mien. 
Now had they reach'd the hills, and storm'd the seat 
Of salvage beasts, in dens, their last retreat. 
The cry pursues the mountain goats: they bound 
From rock to rock, and keep the craggy ground; 
Quite otherwise the stags, a trembling train, 
In herds unsingled, scour the dusty plain, 
And a long chase in open view maintain. 
The glad Ascanius, as his courser guides, 
Spurs thro' the vale, and these and those outrides. 
His horse's flanks and sides are forc'd to feel 
The clanking lash, and goring of the steel. 
Impatiently he views the feeble prey, 
Wishing some nobler beast to cross his way, 
And rather would the tusky boar attend, 
Or see the tawny lion downward bend. 
Meantime, the gath'ring clouds obscure the skies: 
From pole to pole the forky lightning flies; 
The rattling thunders roll; and Juno pours 
A wintry deluge down, and sounding show'rs. 
The company, dispers'd, to converts ride, 
And seek the homely cots, or mountain's hollow side. 
The rapid rains, descending from the hills, 
To rolling torrents raise the creeping rills. 
The queen and prince, as love or fortune guides, 
One common cavern in her bosom hides. 
Then first the trembling earth the signal gave, 
And flashing fires enlighten all the cave; 
Hell from below, and Juno from above, 
And howling nymphs, were conscious of their love. 
From this ill-omen'd hour in time arose 
Debate and death, and all succeeding woes. 
The queen, whom sense of honor could not move, 
No longer made a secret of her love, 
But call'd it marriage, by that specious name 
To veil the crime and sanctify the shame. 
The loud report thro' Libyan cities goes. 
Fame, the great ill, from small beginnings grows: 
Swift from the first; and ev'ry moment brings 
New vigor to her flights, new pinions to her wings. 
Soon grows the pigmy to gigantic size; 
Her feet on earth, her forehead in the skies. 
Inrag'd against the gods, revengeful Earth 
Produc'd her last of the Titanian birth. 
Swift is her walk, more swift her winged haste: 
A monstrous phantom, horrible and vast. 
As many plumes as raise her lofty flight, 
So many piercing eyes inlarge her sight; 
Millions of opening mouths to Fame belong, 
And ev'ry mouth is furnish'd with a tongue, 
And round with list'ning ears the flying plague is hung.

She fills the peaceful universe with cries; 
No slumbers ever close her wakeful eyes; 
By day, from lofty tow'rs her head she shews, 
And spreads thro' trembling crowds disastrous news; 
With court informers haunts, and royal spies; 
Things done relates, not done she feigns, and mingles truth with

lies. 
Talk is her business, and her chief delight 
To tell of prodigies and cause affright. 
She fills the people's ears with Dido's name, 
Who, lost to honor and the sense of shame, 
Admits into her throne and nuptial bed 
A wand'ring guest, who from his country fled: 
Whole days with him she passes in delights, 
And wastes in luxury long winter nights, 
Forgetful of her fame and royal trust, 
Dissolv'd in ease, abandon'd to her lust. 
The goddess widely spreads the loud report, 
And flies at length to King Hyarba's court. 
When first possess'd with this unwelcome news 
Whom did he not of men and gods accuse? 
This prince, from ravish'd Garamantis born, 
A hundred temples did with spoils adorn, 
In Ammon's honor, his celestial sire; 
A hundred altars fed with wakeful fire; 
And, thro' his vast dominions, priests ordain'd, 
Whose watchful care these holy rites maintain'd. 
The gates and columns were with garlands crown'd, 
And blood of victim beasts enrich'd the ground. 
He, when he heard a fugitive could move 
The Tyrian princess, who disdain'd his love, 
His breast with fury burn'd, his eyes with fire, 
Mad with despair, impatient with desire; 
Then on the sacred altars pouring wine, 
He thus with pray'rs implor'd his sire divine: 
"Great Jove! propitious to the Moorish race, 
Who feast on painted beds, with off'rings grace 
Thy temples, and adore thy pow'r divine 
With blood of victims, and with sparkling wine, 
Seest thou not this? or do we fear in vain 
Thy boasted thunder, and thy thoughtless reign? 
Do thy broad hands the forky lightnings lance? 
Thine are the bolts, or the blind work of chance? 
A wand'ring woman builds, within our state, 
A little town, bought at an easy rate; 
She pays me homage, and my grants allow 
A narrow space of Libyan lands to plow; 
Yet, scorning me, by passion blindly led, 
Admits a banish'd Trojan to her bed! 
And now this other Paris, with his train 
Of conquer'd cowards, must in Afric reign! 
(Whom, what they are, their looks and garb confess, 
Their locks with oil perfum'd, their Lydian dress.) 
He takes the spoil, enjoys the princely dame; 
And I, rejected I, adore an empty name." 
His vows, in haughty terms, he thus preferr'd, 
And held his altar's horns. The mighty Thund'rer heard; 
Then cast his eyes on Carthage, where he found 
The lustful pair in lawless pleasure drown'd, 
Lost in their loves, insensible of shame, 
And both forgetful of their better fame. 
He calls Cyllenius, and the god attends, 
By whom his menacing command he sends: 
"Go, mount the western winds, and cleave the sky; 
Then, with a swift descent, to Carthage fly: 
There find the Trojan chief, who wastes his days 
In slothful not and inglorious ease, 
Nor minds the future city, giv'n by fate. 
To him this message from my mouth relate: 
'Not so fair Venus hop'd, when twice she won 
Thy life with pray'rs, nor promis'd such a son. 
Hers was a hero, destin'd to command 
A martial race, and rule the Latian land, 
Who should his ancient line from Teucer draw, 
And on the conquer'd world impose the law.' 
If glory cannot move a mind so mean, 
Nor future praise from fading pleasure wean, 
Yet why should he defraud his son of fame, 
And grudge the Romans their immortal name! 
What are his vain designs! what hopes he more 
From his long ling'ring on a hostile shore, 
Regardless to redeem his honor lost, 
And for his race to gain th' Ausonian coast! 
Bid him with speed the Tyrian court forsake; 
With this command the slumb'ring warrior wake." 
Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds 
His flying feet, and mounts the western winds: 
And, whether o'er the seas or earth he flies, 
With rapid force they bear him down the skies. 
But first he grasps within his awful hand 
The mark of sov'reign pow'r, his magic wand; 
With this he draws the ghosts from hollow graves; 
With this he drives them down the Stygian waves; 
With this he seals in sleep the wakeful sight, 
And eyes, tho' clos'd in death, restores to light. 
Thus arm'd, the god begins his airy race, 
And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space; 
Now sees the tops of Atlas, as he flies, 
Whose brawny back supports the starry skies; 
Atlas, whose head, with piny forests crown'd, 
Is beaten by the winds, with foggy vapors bound. 
Snows hide his shoulders; from beneath his chin 
The founts of rolling streams their race begin; 
A beard of ice on his large breast depends. 
Here, pois'd upon his wings, the god descends: 
Then, rested thus, he from the tow'ring height 
Plung'd downward, with precipitated flight, 
Lights on the seas, and skims along the flood. 
As waterfowl, who seek their fishy food, 
Less, and yet less, to distant prospect show; 
By turns they dance aloft, and dive below: 
Like these, the steerage of his wings he plies, 
And near the surface of the water flies, 
Till, having pass'd the seas, and cross'd the sands, 
He clos'd his wings, and stoop'd on Libyan lands: 
Where shepherds once were hous'd in homely sheds, 
Now tow'rs within the clouds advance their heads. 
Arriving there, he found the Trojan prince 
New ramparts raising for the town's defense. 
A purple scarf, with gold embroider'd o'er, 
(Queen Dido's gift,) about his waist he wore; 
A sword, with glitt'ring gems diversified, 
For ornament, not use, hung idly by his side. 
Then thus, with winged words, the god began, 
Resuming his own shape: "Degenerate man, 
Thou woman's property, what mak'st thou here, 
These foreign walls and Tyrian tow'rs to rear, 
Forgetful of thy own? All-pow'rful Jove, 
Who sways the world below and heav'n above, 
Has sent me down with this severe command: 
What means thy ling'ring in the Libyan land? 
If glory cannot move a mind so mean, 
Nor future praise from flitting pleasure wean, 
Regard the fortunes of thy rising heir: 
The promis'd crown let young Ascanius wear, 
To whom th' Ausonian scepter, and the state 
Of Rome's imperial name is ow'd by fate." 
So spoke the god; and, speaking, took his flight, 
Involv'd in clouds, and vanish'd out of sight. 
The pious prince was seiz'd with sudden fear; 
Mute was his tongue, and upright stood his hair. 
Revolving in his mind the stern command, 
He longs to fly, and loathes the charming land. 
What should he say? or how should he begin? 
What course, alas! remains to steer between 
Th' offended lover and the pow'rful queen? 
This way and that he turns his anxious mind, 
And all expedients tries, and none can find. 
Fix'd on the deed, but doubtful of the means, 
After long thought, to this advice he leans: 
Three chiefs he calls, commands them to repair 
The fleet, and ship their men with silent care; 
Some plausible pretense he bids them find, 
To color what in secret he design'd. 
Himself, meantime, the softest hours would choose, 
Before the love-sick lady heard the news; 
And move her tender mind, by slow degrees, 
To suffer what the sov'reign pow'r decrees: 
Jove will inspire him, when, and what to say. 
They hear with pleasure, and with haste obey. 
But soon the queen perceives the thin disguise: 
(What arts can blind a jealous woman's eyes!) 
She was the first to find the secret fraud, 
Before the fatal news was blaz'd abroad. 
Love the first motions of the lover hears, 
Quick to presage, and ev'n in safety fears. 
Nor impious Fame was wanting to report 
The ships repair'd, the Trojans' thick resort, 
And purpose to forsake the Tyrian court. 
Frantic with fear, impatient of the wound, 
And impotent of mind, she roves the city round. 
Less wild the Bacchanalian dames appear, 
When, from afar, their nightly god they hear, 
And howl about the hills, and shake the wreathy spear. 
At length she finds the dear perfidious man; 
Prevents his form'd excuse, and thus began: 
"Base and ungrateful! could you hope to fly, 
And undiscover'd scape a lover's eye? 
Nor could my kindness your compassion move. 
Nor plighted vows, nor dearer bands of love? 
Or is the death of a despairing queen 
Not worth preventing, tho' too well foreseen? 
Ev'n when the wintry winds command your stay, 
You dare the tempests, and defy the sea. 
False as you are, suppose you were not bound 
To lands unknown, and foreign coasts to sound; 
Were Troy restor'd, and Priam's happy reign, 
Now durst you tempt, for Troy, the raging main? 
See whom you fly! am I the foe you shun? 
Now, by those holy vows, so late begun, 
By this right hand, (since I have nothing more 
To challenge, but the faith you gave before;) 
I beg you by these tears too truly shed, 
By the new pleasures of our nuptial bed; 
If ever Dido, when you most were kind, 
Were pleasing in your eyes, or touch'd your mind; 
By these my pray'rs, if pray'rs may yet have place, 
Pity the fortunes of a falling race. 
For you I have provok'd a tyrant's hate, 
Incens'd the Libyan and the Tyrian state; 
For you alone I suffer in my fame, 
Bereft of honor, and expos'd to shame. 
Whom have I now to trust, ungrateful guest? 
(That only name remains of all the rest!) 
What have I left? or whither can I fly? 
Must I attend Pygmalion's cruelty, 
Or till Hyarba shall in triumph lead 
A queen that proudly scorn'd his proffer'd bed? 
Had you deferr'd, at least, your hasty flight, 
And left behind some pledge of our delight, 
Some babe to bless the mother's mournful sight, 
Some young Aeneas, to supply your place, 
Whose features might express his father's face; 
I should not then complain to live bereft 
Of all my husband, or be wholly left." 
Here paus'd the queen. Unmov'd he holds his eyes, 
By Jove's command; nor suffer'd love to rise, 
Tho' heaving in his heart; and thus at length replies: 
"Fair queen, you never can enough repeat 
Your boundless favors, or I own my debt; 
Nor can my mind forget Eliza's name, 
While vital breath inspires this mortal frame. 
This only let me speak in my defense: 
I never hop'd a secret flight from hence, 
Much less pretended to the lawful claim 
Of sacred nuptials, or a husband's name. 
For, if indulgent Heav'n would leave me free, 
And not submit my life to fate's decree, 
My choice would lead me to the Trojan shore, 
Those relics to review, their dust adore, 
And Priam's ruin'd palace to restore. 
But now the Delphian oracle commands, 
And fate invites me to the Latian lands. 
That is the promis'd place to which I steer, 
And all my vows are terminated there. 
If you, a Tyrian, and a stranger born, 
With walls and tow'rs a Libyan town adorn, 
Why may not we- like you, a foreign race- 
Like you, seek shelter in a foreign place? 
As often as the night obscures the skies 
With humid shades, or twinkling stars arise, 
Anchises' angry ghost in dreams appears, 
Chides my delay, and fills my soul with fears; 
And young Ascanius justly may complain 
Of his defrauded and destin'd reign. 
Ev'n now the herald of the gods appear'd: 
Waking I saw him, and his message heard. 
From Jove he came commission'd, heav'nly bright 
With radiant beams, and manifest to sight 
(The sender and the sent I both attest) 
These walls he enter'd, and those words express'd. 
Fair queen, oppose not what the gods command; 
Forc'd by my fate, I leave your happy land." 
Thus while he spoke, already she began, 
With sparkling eyes, to view the guilty man; 
From head to foot survey'd his person o'er, 
Nor longer these outrageous threats forebore: 
"False as thou art, and, more than false, forsworn! 
Not sprung from noble blood, nor goddess-born, 
But hewn from harden'd entrails of a rock! 
And rough Hyrcanian tigers gave thee suck! 
Why should I fawn? what have I worse to fear? 
Did he once look, or lent a list'ning ear, 
Sigh'd when I sobb'd, or shed one kindly tear?- 
All symptoms of a base ungrateful mind, 
So foul, that, which is worse, 'tis hard to find. 
Of man's injustice why should I complain? 
The gods, and Jove himself, behold in vain 
Triumphant treason; yet no thunder flies, 
Nor Juno views my wrongs with equal eyes; 
Faithless is earth, and faithless are the skies! 
Justice is fled, and Truth is now no more! 
I sav'd the shipwrack'd exile on my shore; 
With needful food his hungry Trojans fed; 
I took the traitor to my throne and bed: 
Fool that I was- 't is little to repeat 
The rest- I stor'd and rigg'd his ruin'd fleet. 
I rave, I rave! A god's command he pleads, 
And makes Heav'n accessary to his deeds. 
Now Lycian lots, and now the Delian god, 
Now Hermes is employ'd from Jove's abode, 
To warn him hence; as if the peaceful state 
Of heav'nly pow'rs were touch'd with human fate! 
But go! thy flight no longer I detain- 
Go seek thy promis'd kingdom thro' the main! 
Yet, if the heav'ns will hear my pious vow, 
The faithless waves, not half so false as thou, 
Or secret sands, shall sepulchers afford 
To thy proud vessels, and their perjur'd lord. 
Then shalt thou call on injur'd Dido's name: 
Dido shall come in a black sulph'ry flame, 
When death has once dissolv'd her mortal frame; 
Shall smile to see the traitor vainly weep: 
Her angry ghost, arising from the deep, 
Shall haunt thee waking, and disturb thy sleep. 
At least my shade thy punishment shall know, 
And Fame shall spread the pleasing news below." 
Abruptly here she stops; then turns away 
Her loathing eyes, and shuns the sight of day. 
Amaz'd he stood, revolving in his mind 
What speech to frame, and what excuse to find. 
Her fearful maids their fainting mistress led, 
And softly laid her on her ivory bed. 
But good Aeneas, tho' he much desir'd 
To give that pity which her grief requir'd; 
Tho' much he mourn'd, and labor'd with his love, 
Resolv'd at length, obeys the will of Jove; 
Reviews his forces: they with early care 
Unmoor their vessels, and for sea prepare. 
The fleet is soon afloat, in all its pride, 
And well-calk'd galleys in the harbor ride. 
Then oaks for oars they fell'd; or, as they stood, 
Of its green arms despoil'd the growing wood, 
Studious of flight. The beach is cover'd o'er 
With Trojan bands, that blacken all the shore: 
On ev'ry side are seen, descending down, 
Thick swarms of soldiers, loaden from the town. 
Thus, in battalia, march embodied ants, 
Fearful of winter, and of future wants, 
T' invade the corn, and to their cells convey 
The plunder'd forage of their yellow prey. 
The sable troops, along the narrow tracks, 
Scarce bear the weighty burthen on their backs: 
Some set their shoulders to the pond'rous grain; 
Some guard the spoil; some lash the lagging train; 
All ply their sev'ral tasks, and equal toil sustain. 
What pangs the tender breast of Dido tore, 
When, from the tow'r, she saw the cover'd shore, 
And heard the shouts of sailors from afar, 
Mix'd with the murmurs of the wat'ry war! 
All-pow'rful Love! what changes canst thou cause 
In human hearts, subjected to thy laws! 
Once more her haughty soul the tyrant bends: 
To pray'rs and mean submissions she descends. 
No female arts or aids she left untried, 
Nor counsels unexplor'd, before she died. 
"Look, Anna! look! the Trojans crowd to sea; 
They spread their canvas, and their anchors weigh. 
The shouting crew their ships with garlands bind, 
Invoke the sea gods, and invite the wind. 
Could I have thought this threat'ning blow so near, 
My tender soul had been forewarn'd to bear. 
But do not you my last request deny; 
With yon perfidious man your int'rest try, 
And bring me news, if I must live or die. 
You are his fav'rite; you alone can find 
The dark recesses of his inmost mind: 
In all his trusted secrets you have part, 
And know the soft approaches to his heart. 
Haste then, and humbly seek my haughty foe; 
Tell him, I did not with the Grecians go, 
Nor did my fleet against his friends employ, 
Nor swore the ruin of unhappy Troy, 
Nor mov'd with hands profane his father's dust: 
Why should he then reject a just! 
Whom does he shun, and whither would he fly! 
Can he this last, this only pray'r deny! 
Let him at least his dang'rous flight delay, 
Wait better winds, and hope a calmer sea. 
The nuptials he disclaims I urge no more: 
Let him pursue the promis'd Latian shore. 
A short delay is all I ask him now; 
A pause of grief, an interval from woe, 
Till my soft soul be temper'd to sustain 
Accustom'd sorrows, and inur'd to pain. 
If you in pity grant this one request, 
My death shall glut the hatred of his breast." 
This mournful message pious Anna bears, 
And seconds with her own her sister's tears: 
But all her arts are still employ'd in vain; 
Again she comes, and is refus'd again. 
His harden'd heart nor pray'rs nor threat'nings move; 
Fate, and the god, had stopp'd his ears to love. 
As, when the winds their airy quarrel try, 
Justling from ev'ry quarter of the sky, 
This way and that the mountain oak they bend, 
His boughs they shatter, and his branches rend; 
With leaves and falling mast they spread the ground; 
The hollow valleys echo to the sound: 
Unmov'd, the royal plant their fury mocks, 
Or, shaken, clings more closely to the rocks; 
Far as he shoots his tow'ring head on high, 
So deep in earth his fix'd foundations lie. 
No less a storm the Trojan hero bears; 
Thick messages and loud complaints he hears, 
And bandied words, still beating on his ears. 
Sighs, groans, and tears proclaim his inward pains; 
But the firm purpose of his heart remains. 
The wretched queen, pursued by cruel fate, 
Begins at length the light of heav'n to hate, 
And loathes to live. Then dire portents she sees, 
To hasten on the death her soul decrees: 
Strange to relate! for when, before the shrine, 
She pours in sacrifice the purple wine, 
The purple wine is turn'd to putrid blood, 
And the white offer'd milk converts to mud. 
This dire presage, to her alone reveal'd, 
From all, and ev'n her sister, she conceal'd. 
A marble temple stood within the grove, 
Sacred to death, and to her murther'd love; 
That honor'd chapel she had hung around 
With snowy fleeces, and with garlands crown'd: 
Oft, when she visited this lonely dome, 
Strange voices issued from her husband's tomb; 
She thought she heard him summon her away, 
Invite her to his grave, and chide her stay. 
Hourly 't is heard, when with a boding note 
The solitary screech owl strains her throat, 
And, on a chimney's top, or turret's height, 
With songs obscene disturbs the silence of the night. 
Besides, old prophecies augment her fears; 
And stern Aeneas in her dreams appears, 
Disdainful as by day: she seems, alone, 
To wander in her sleep, thro' ways unknown, 
Guideless and dark; or, in a desart plain, 
To seek her subjects, and to seek in vain: 
Like Pentheus, when, distracted with his fear, 
He saw two suns, and double Thebes, appear; 
Or mad Orestes, when his mother's ghost 
Full in his face infernal torches toss'd, 
And shook her snaky locks: he shuns the sight, 
Flies o'er the stage, surpris'd with mortal fright; 
The Furies guard the door and intercept his flight. 
Now, sinking underneath a load of grief, 
From death alone she seeks her last relief; 
The time and means resolv'd within her breast, 
She to her mournful sister thus address'd 
(Dissembling hope, her cloudy front she clears, 
And a false vigor in her eyes appears): 
"Rejoice!" she said. "Instructed from above, 
My lover I shall gain, or lose my love. 
Nigh rising Atlas, next the falling sun, 
Long tracts of Ethiopian climates run: 
There a Massylian priestess I have found, 
Honor'd for age, for magic arts renown'd: 
Th' Hesperian temple was her trusted care; 
'T was she supplied the wakeful dragon's fare. 
She poppy seeds in honey taught to steep, 
Reclaim'd his rage, and sooth'd him into sleep. 
She watch'd the golden fruit; her charms unbind 
The chains of love, or fix them on the mind: 
She stops the torrents, leaves the channel dry, 
Repels the stars, and backward bears the sky. 
The yawning earth rebellows to her call, 
Pale ghosts ascend, and mountain ashes fall. 
Witness, ye gods, and thou my better part, 
How loth I am to try this impious art! 
Within the secret court, with silent care, 
Erect a lofty pile, expos'd in air: 
Hang on the topmost part the Trojan vest, 
Spoils, arms, and presents, of my faithless guest. 
Next, under these, the bridal bed be plac'd, 
Where I my ruin in his arms embrac'd: 
All relics of the wretch are doom'd to fire; 
For so the priestess and her charms require." 
Thus far she said, and farther speech forbears; 
A mortal paleness in her face appears: 
Yet the mistrustless Anna could not find 
The secret fun'ral in these rites design'd; 
Nor thought so dire a rage possess'd her mind. 
Unknowing of a train conceal'd so well, 
She fear'd no worse than when Sichaeus fell; 
Therefore obeys. The fatal pile they rear, 
Within the secret court, expos'd in air. 
The cloven holms and pines are heap'd on high, 
And garlands on the hollow spaces lie. 
Sad cypress, vervain, yew, compose the wreath, 
And ev'ry baleful green denoting death. 
The queen, determin'd to the fatal deed, 
The spoils and sword he left, in order spread, 
And the man's image on the nuptial bed. 
And now (the sacred altars plac'd around) 
The priestess enters, with her hair unbound, 
And thrice invokes the pow'rs below the ground. 
Night, Erebus, and Chaos she proclaims, 
And threefold Hecate, with her hundred names, 
And three Dianas: next, she sprinkles round 
With feign'd Avernian drops the hallow'd ground; 
Culls hoary simples, found by Phoebe's light, 
With brazen sickles reap'd at noon of night; 
Then mixes baleful juices in the bowl, 
And cuts the forehead of a newborn foal, 
Robbing the mother's love. The destin'd queen 
Observes, assisting at the rites obscene; 
A leaven'd cake in her devoted hands 
She holds, and next the highest altar stands: 
One tender foot was shod, her other bare; 
Girt was her gather'd gown, and loose her hair. 
Thus dress'd, she summon'd, with her dying breath, 
The heav'ns and planets conscious of her death, 
And ev'ry pow'r, if any rules above, 
Who minds, or who revenges, injur'd love. 
"'T was dead of night, when weary bodies close 
Their eyes in balmy sleep and soft repose: 
The winds no longer whisper thro' the woods, 
Nor murm'ring tides disturb the gentle floods. 
The stars in silent order mov'd around; 
And Peace, with downy wings, was brooding on the ground 
The flocks and herds, and party-color'd fowl, 
Which haunt the woods, or swim the weedy pool, 
Stretch'd on the quiet earth, securely lay, 
Forgetting the past labors of the day. 
All else of nature's common gift partake: 
Unhappy Dido was alone awake. 
Nor sleep nor ease the furious queen can find; 
Sleep fled her eyes, as quiet fled her mind. 
Despair, and rage, and love divide her heart; 
Despair and rage had some, but love the greater part. 
Then thus she said within her secret mind: 
"What shall I do? what succor can I find? 
Become a suppliant to Hyarba's pride, 
And take my turn, to court and be denied? 
Shall I with this ungrateful Trojan go, 
Forsake an empire, and attend a foe? 
Himself I refug'd, and his train reliev'd- 
'T is true- but am I sure to be receiv'd? 
Can gratitude in Trojan souls have place! 
Laomedon still lives in all his race! 
Then, shall I seek alone the churlish crew, 
Or with my fleet their flying sails pursue? 
What force have I but those whom scarce before 
I drew reluctant from their native shore? 
Will they again embark at my desire, 
Once more sustain the seas, and quit their second Tyre? 
Rather with steel thy guilty breast invade, 
And take the fortune thou thyself hast made. 
Your pity, sister, first seduc'd my mind, 
Or seconded too well what I design'd. 
These dear-bought pleasures had I never known, 
Had I continued free, and still my own; 
Avoiding love, I had not found despair, 
But shar'd with salvage beasts the common air. 
Like them, a lonely life I might have led, 
Not mourn'd the living, nor disturb'd the dead." 
These thoughts she brooded in her anxious breast. 
On board, the Trojan found more easy rest. 
Resolv'd to sail, in sleep he pass'd the night; 
And order'd all things for his early flight. 
To whom once more the winged god appears; 
His former youthful mien and shape he wears, 
And with this new alarm invades his ears: 
"Sleep'st thou, O goddess-born! and canst thou drown 
Thy needful cares, so near a hostile town, 
Beset with foes; nor hear'st the western gales 
Invite thy passage, and inspire thy sails? 
She harbors in her heart a furious hate, 
And thou shalt find the dire effects too late; 
Fix'd on revenge, and obstinate to die. 
Haste swiftly hence, while thou hast pow'r to fly. 
The sea with ships will soon be cover'd o'er, 
And blazing firebrands kindle all the shore. 
Prevent her rage, while night obscures the skies, 
And sail before the purple morn arise. 
Who knows what hazards thy delay may bring? 
Woman's a various and a changeful thing." 
Thus Hermes in the dream; then took his flight 
Aloft in air unseen, and mix'd with night. 
Twice warn'd by the celestial messenger, 
The pious prince arose with hasty fear; 
Then rous'd his drowsy train without delay: 
"Haste to your banks; your crooked anchors weigh, 
And spread your flying sails, and stand to sea. 
A god commands: he stood before my sight, 
And urg'd us once again to speedy flight. 
O sacred pow'r, what pow'r soe'er thou art, 
To thy blest orders I resign my heart. 
Lead thou the way; protect thy Trojan bands, 
And prosper the design thy will commands." 
He said: and, drawing forth his flaming sword, 
His thund'ring arm divides the many-twisted cord. 
An emulating zeal inspires his train: 
They run; they snatch; they rush into the main. 
With headlong haste they leave the desert shores, 
And brush the liquid seas with lab'ring oars. 
Aurora now had left her saffron bed, 
And beams of early light the heav'ns o'erspread, 
When, from a tow'r, the queen, with wakeful eyes, 
Saw day point upward from the rosy skies. 
She look'd to seaward; but the sea was void, 
And scarce in ken the sailing ships descried. 
Stung with despite, and furious with despair, 
She struck her trembling breast, and tore her hair. 
"And shall th' ungrateful traitor go," she said, 
"My land forsaken, and my love betray'd? 
Shall we not arm? not rush from ev'ry street, 
To follow, sink, and burn his perjur'd fleet? 
Haste, haul my galleys out! pursue the foe! 
Bring flaming brands! set sail, and swiftly row! 
What have I said? where am I? Fury turns 
My brain; and my distemper'd bosom burns. 
Then, when I gave my person and my throne, 
This hate, this rage, had been more timely shown. 
See now the promis'd faith, the vaunted name, 
The pious man, who, rushing thro' the flame, 
Preserv'd his gods, and to the Phrygian shore 
The burthen of his feeble father bore! 
I should have torn him piecemeal; strow'd in floods 
His scatter'd limbs, or left expos'd in woods; 
Destroy'd his friends and son; and, from the fire, 
Have set the reeking boy before the sire. 
Events are doubtful, which on battles wait: 
Yet where's the doubt, to souls secure of fate? 
My Tyrians, at their injur'd queen's command, 
Had toss'd their fires amid the Trojan band; 
At once extinguish'd all the faithless name; 
And I myself, in vengeance of my shame, 
Had fall'n upon the pile, to mend the fun'ral flame. 
Thou Sun, who view'st at once the world below; 
Thou Juno, guardian of the nuptial vow; 
Thou Hecate hearken from thy dark abodes! 
Ye Furies, fiends, and violated gods, 
All pow'rs invok'd with Dido's dying breath, 
Attend her curses and avenge her death! 
If so the Fates ordain, Jove commands, 
Th' ungrateful wretch should find the Latian lands, 
Yet let a race untam'd, and haughty foes, 
His peaceful entrance with dire arms oppose: 
Oppress'd with numbers in th' unequal field, 
His men discourag'd, and himself expell'd, 
Let him for succor sue from place to place, 
Torn from his subjects, and his son's embrace. 
First, let him see his friends in battle slain, 
And their untimely fate lament in vain; 
And when, at length, the cruel war shall cease, 
On hard conditions may he buy his peace: 
Nor let him then enjoy supreme command; 
But fall, untimely, by some hostile hand, 
And lie unburied on the barren sand! 
These are my pray'rs, and this my dying will; 
And you, my Tyrians, ev'ry curse fulfil. 
Perpetual hate and mortal wars proclaim, 
Against the prince, the people, and the name. 
These grateful off'rings on my grave bestow; 
Nor league, nor love, the hostile nations know! 
Now, and from hence, in ev'ry future age, 
When rage excites your arms, and strength supplies the rage

Rise some avenger of our Libyan blood, 
With fire and sword pursue the perjur'd brood; 
Our arms, our seas, our shores, oppos'd to theirs; 
And the same hate descend on all our heirs!" 
This said, within her anxious mind she weighs 
The means of cutting short her odious days. 
Then to Sichaeus' nurse she briefly said 
(For, when she left her country, hers was dead): 
"Go, Barce, call my sister. Let her care 
The solemn rites of sacrifice prepare; 
The sheep, and all th' atoning off'rings bring, 
Sprinkling her body from the crystal spring 
With living drops; then let her come, and thou 
With sacred fillets bind thy hoary brow. 
Thus will I pay my vows to Stygian Jove, 
And end the cares of my disastrous love; 
Then cast the Trojan image on the fire, 
And, as that burns, my passions shall expire." 
The nurse moves onward, with officious care, 
And all the speed her aged limbs can bear. 
But furious Dido, with dark thoughts involv'd, 
Shook at the mighty mischief she resolv'd. 
With livid spots distinguish'd was her face; 
Red were her rolling eyes, and discompos'd her pace; 
Ghastly she gaz'd, with pain she drew her breath, 
And nature shiver'd at approaching death. 
Then swiftly to the fatal place she pass'd, 
And mounts the fun'ral pile with furious haste; 
Unsheathes the sword the Trojan left behind 
(Not for so dire an enterprise design'd). 
But when she view'd the garments loosely spread, 
Which once he wore, and saw the conscious bed, 
She paus'd, and with a sigh the robes embrac'd; 
Then on the couch her trembling body cast, 
Repress'd the ready tears, and spoke her last: 
"Dear pledges of my love, while Heav'n so pleas'd, 
Receive a soul, of mortal anguish eas'd: 
My fatal course is finish'd; and I go, 
A glorious name, among the ghosts below. 
A lofty city by my hands is rais'd, 
Pygmalion punish'd, and my lord appeas'd. 
What could my fortune have afforded more, 
Had the false Trojan never touch'd my shore!" 
Then kiss'd the couch; and, "Must I die," she said, 
"And unreveng'd? 'T is doubly to be dead! 
Yet ev'n this death with pleasure I receive: 
On any terms, 't is better than to live. 
These flames, from far, may the false Trojan view; 
These boding omens his base flight pursue!" 
She said, and struck; deep enter'd in her side 
The piercing steel, with reeking purple dyed: 
Clogg'd in the wound the cruel weapon stands; 
The spouting blood came streaming on her hands. 
Her sad attendants saw the deadly stroke, 
And with loud cries the sounding palace shook. 
Distracted, from the fatal sight they fled, 
And thro' the town the dismal rumor spread. 
First from the frighted court the yell began; 
Redoubled, thence from house to house it ran: 
The groans of men, with shrieks, laments, and cries 
Of mixing women, mount the vaulted skies. 
Not less the clamor, than if- ancient Tyre, 
Or the new Carthage, set by foes on fire- 
The rolling ruin, with their lov'd abodes, 
Involv'd the blazing temples of their gods. 
Her sister hears; and, furious with despair, 
She beats her breast, and rends her yellow hair, 
And, calling on Eliza's name aloud, 
Runs breathless to the place, and breaks the crowd. 
"Was all that pomp of woe for this prepar'd; 
These fires, this fun'ral pile, these altars rear'd? 
Was all this train of plots contriv'd," said she, 
"All only to deceive unhappy me? 
Which is the worst? Didst thou in death pretend 
To scorn thy sister, or delude thy friend? 
Thy summon'd sister, and thy friend, had come; 
One sword had serv'd us both, one common tomb: 
Was I to raise the pile, the pow'rs invoke, 
Not to be present at the fatal stroke? 
At once thou hast destroy'd thyself and me, 
Thy town, thy senate, and thy colony! 
Bring water; bathe the wound; while I in death 
Lay close my lips to hers, and catch the flying breath."

This said, she mounts the pile with eager haste, 
And in her arms the gasping queen embrac'd; 
Her temples chaf'd; and her own garments tore, 
To stanch the streaming blood, and cleanse the gore. 
Thrice Dido tried to raise her drooping head, 
And, fainting thrice, fell grov'ling on the bed; 
Thrice op'd her heavy eyes, and sought the light, 
But, having found it, sicken'd at the sight, 
And clos'd her lids at last in endless night. 
Then Juno, grieving that she should sustain 
A death so ling'ring, and so full of pain, 
Sent Iris down, to free her from the strife 
Of lab'ring nature, and dissolve her life. 
For since she died, not doom'd by Heav'n's decree, 
Or her own crime, but human casualty, 
And rage of love, that plung'd her in despair, 
The Sisters had not cut the topmost hair, 
Which Proserpine and they can only know; 
Nor made her sacred to the shades below. 
Downward the various goddess took her flight, 
And drew a thousand colors from the light; 
Then stood above the dying lover's head, 
And said: "I thus devote thee to the dead. 
This off'ring to th' infernal gods I bear." 
Thus while she spoke, she cut the fatal hair: 
The struggling soul was loos'd, and life dissolv'd in air.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK V

Meantime the Trojan cuts his wat'ry way, 
Fix'd on his voyage, thro' the curling sea; 
Then, casting back his eyes, with dire amaze, 
Sees on the Punic shore the mounting blaze. 
The cause unknown; yet his presaging mind 
The fate of Dido from the fire divin'd; 
He knew the stormy souls of womankind, 
What secret springs their eager passions move, 
How capable of death for injur'd love. 
Dire auguries from hence the Trojans draw; 
Till neither fires nor shining shores they saw. 
Now seas and skies their prospect only bound; 
An empty space above, a floating field around. 
But soon the heav'ns with shadows were o'erspread; 
A swelling cloud hung hov'ring o'er their head: 
Livid it look'd, the threat'ning of a storm: 
Then night and horror ocean's face deform. 
The pilot, Palinurus, cried aloud: 
"What gusts of weather from that gath'ring cloud 
My thoughts presage! Ere yet the tempest roars, 
Stand to your tackle, mates, and stretch your oars; 
Contract your swelling sails, and luff to wind." 
The frighted crew perform the task assign'd. 
Then, to his fearless chief: "Not Heav'n," said he, 
"Tho' Jove himself should promise Italy, 
Can stem the torrent of this raging sea. 
Mark how the shifting winds from west arise, 
And what collected night involves the skies! 
Nor can our shaken vessels live at sea, 
Much less against the tempest force their way. 
'T is fate diverts our course, and fate we must obey. 
Not far from hence, if I observ'd aright 
The southing of the stars, and polar light, 
Sicilia lies, whose hospitable shores 
In safety we may reach with struggling oars." 
Aeneas then replied: "Too sure I find 
We strive in vain against the seas and wind: 
Now shift your sails; what place can please me more 
Than what you promise, the Sicilian shore, 
Whose hallow'd earth Anchises' bones contains, 
And where a prince of Trojan lineage reigns?" 
The course resolv'd, before the western wind 
They scud amain, and make the port assign'd. 
Meantime Acestes, from a lofty stand, 
Beheld the fleet descending on the land; 
And, not unmindful of his ancient race, 
Down from the cliff he ran with eager pace, 
And held the hero in a strict embrace. 
Of a rough Libyan bear the spoils he wore, 
And either hand a pointed jav'lin bore. 
His mother was a dame of Dardan blood; 
His sire Crinisus, a Sicilian flood. 
He welcomes his returning friends ashore 
With plenteous country cates and homely store. 
Now, when the following morn had chas'd away 
The flying stars, and light restor'd the day, 
Aeneas call'd the Trojan troops around, 
And thus bespoke them from a rising ground: 
"Offspring of heav'n, divine Dardanian race! 
The sun, revolving thro' th' ethereal space, 
The shining circle of the year has fill'd, 
Since first this isle my father's ashes held: 
And now the rising day renews the year; 
A day for ever sad, for ever dear. 
This would I celebrate with annual games, 
With gifts on altars pil'd, and holy flames, 
Tho' banish'd to Gaetulia's barren sands, 
Caught on the Grecian seas, or hostile lands: 
But since this happy storm our fleet has driv'n 
(Not, as I deem, without the will of Heav'n) 
Upon these friendly shores and flow'ry plains, 
Which hide Anchises and his blest remains, 
Let us with joy perform his honors due, 
And pray for prosp'rous winds, our voyage to renew; 
Pray, that in towns and temples of our own, 
The name of great Anchises may be known, 
And yearly games may spread the gods' renown. 
Our sports Acestes, of the Trojan race, 
With royal gifts ordain'd, is pleas'd to grace: 
Two steers on ev'ry ship the king bestows; 
His gods and ours shall share your equal vows. 
Besides, if, nine days hence, the rosy morn 
Shall with unclouded light the skies adorn, 
That day with solemn sports I mean to grace: 
Light galleys on the seas shall run a wat'ry race; 
Some shall in swiftness for the goal contend, 
And others try the twanging bow to bend; 
The strong, with iron gauntlets arm'd, shall stand 
Oppos'd in combat on the yellow sand. 
Let all be present at the games prepar'd, 
And joyful victors wait the just reward. 
But now assist the rites, with garlands crown'd." 
He said, and first his brows with myrtle bound. 
Then Helymus, by his example led, 
And old Acestes, each adorn'd his head; 
Thus young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace, 
His temples tied, and all the Trojan race. 
Aeneas then advanc'd amidst the train, 
By thousands follow'd thro' the flow'ry plain, 
To great Anchises' tomb; which when he found, 
He pour'd to Bacchus, on the hallow'd ground, 
Two bowls of sparkling wine, of milk two more, 
And two (from offer'd bulls) of purple gore, 
With roses then the sepulcher he strow'd 
And thus his father's ghost bespoke aloud: 
"Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again, 
Paternal ashes, now review'd in vain! 
The gods permitted not, that you, with me, 
Should reach the promis'd shores of Italy, 
Or Tiber's flood, what flood soe'er it be." 
Scarce had he finish'd, when, with speckled pride, 
A serpent from the tomb began to glide; 
His hugy bulk on sev'n high volumes roll'd; 
Blue was his breadth of back, but streak'd with scaly gold:

Thus riding on his curls, he seem'd to pass 
A rolling fire along, and singe the grass. 
More various colors thro' his body run, 
Than Iris when her bow imbibes the sun. 
Betwixt the rising altars, and around, 
The sacred monster shot along the ground; 
With harmless play amidst the bowls he pass'd, 
And with his lolling tongue assay'd the taste: 
Thus fed with holy food, the wondrous guest 
Within the hollow tomb retir'd to rest. 
The pious prince, surpris'd at what he view'd, 
The fun'ral honors with more zeal renew'd, 
Doubtful if this place's genius were, 
Or guardian of his father's sepulcher. 
Five sheep, according to the rites, he slew; 
As many swine, and steers of sable hue; 
New gen'rous wine he from the goblets pour'd. 
And call'd his father's ghost, from hell restor'd. 
The glad attendants in long order come, 
Off'ring their gifts at great Anchises' tomb: 
Some add more oxen: some divide the spoil; 
Some place the chargers on the grassy soil; 
Some blow the fires, and off entrails broil. 
Now came the day desir'd. The skies were bright 
With rosy luster of the rising light: 
The bord'ring people, rous'd by sounding fame 
Of Trojan feasts and great Acestes' name, 
The crowded shore with acclamations fill, 
Part to behold, and part to prove their skill. 
And first the gifts in public view they place, 
Green laurel wreaths, and palm, the victors' grace: 
Within the circle, arms and tripods lie, 
Ingots of gold and silver, heap'd on high, 
And vests embroider'd, of the Tyrian dye. 
The trumpet's clangor then the feast proclaims, 
And all prepare for their appointed games. 
Four galleys first, which equal rowers bear, 
Advancing, in the wat'ry lists appear. 
The speedy Dolphin, that outstrips the wind, 
Bore Mnestheus, author of the Memmian kind: 
Gyas the vast Chimaera's bulk commands, 
Which rising, like a tow'ring city stands; 
Three Trojans tug at ev'ry lab'ring oar; 
Three banks in three degrees the sailors bore; 
Beneath their sturdy strokes the billows roar. 
Sergesthus, who began the Sergian race, 
In the great Centaur took the leading place; 
Cloanthus on the sea-green Scylla stood, 
From whom Cluentius draws his Trojan blood. 
Far in the sea, against the foaming shore, 
There stands a rock: the raging billows roar 
Above his head in storms; but, when 't is clear, 
Uncurl their ridgy backs, and at his foot appear. 
In peace below the gentle waters run; 
The cormorants above lie basking in the sun. 
On this the hero fix'd an oak in sight, 
The mark to guide the mariners aright. 
To bear with this, the seamen stretch their oars; 
Then round the rock they steer, and seek the former shores.

The lots decide their place. Above the rest, 
Each leader shining in his Tyrian vest; 
The common crew with wreaths of poplar boughs 
Their temples crown, and shade their sweaty brows: 
Besmear'd with oil, their naked shoulders shine. 
All take their seats, and wait the sounding sign: 
They gripe their oars; and ev'ry panting breast 
Is rais'd by turns with hope, by turns with fear depress'd.

The clangor of the trumpet gives the sign; 
At once they start, advancing in a line: 
With shouts the sailors rend the starry skies; 
Lash'd with their oars, the smoky billows rise; 
Sparkles the briny main, and the vex'd ocean fries. 
Exact in time, with equal strokes they row: 
At once the brushing oars and brazen prow 
Dash up the sandy waves, and ope the depths below. 
Not fiery coursers, in a chariot race, 
Invade the field with half so swift a pace; 
Not the fierce driver with more fury lends 
The sounding lash, and, ere the stroke descends, 
Low to the wheels his pliant body bends. 
The partial crowd their hopes and fears divide, 
And aid with eager shouts the favor'd side. 
Cries, murmurs, clamors, with a mixing sound, 
From woods to woods, from hills to hills rebound. 
Amidst the loud applauses of the shore, 
Gyas outstripp'd the rest, and sprung before: 
Cloanthus, better mann'd, pursued him fast, 
But his o'er-masted galley check'd his haste. 
The Centaur and the Dolphin brush the brine 
With equal oars, advancing in a line; 
And now the mighty Centaur seems to lead, 
And now the speedy Dolphin gets ahead; 
Now board to board the rival vessels row, 
The billows lave the skies, and ocean groans below. 
They reach'd the mark. Proud Gyas and his train 
In triumph rode, the victors of the main; 
But, steering round, he charg'd his pilot stand 
More close to shore, and skim along the sand- 
"Let others bear to sea!" Menoetes heard; 
But secret shelves too cautiously he fear'd, 
And, fearing, sought the deep; and still aloof he steer'd.

With louder cries the captain call'd again: 
"Bear to the rocky shore, and shun the main." 
He spoke, and, speaking, at his stern he saw 
The bold Cloanthus near the shelvings draw. 
Betwixt the mark and him the Scylla stood, 
And in a closer compass plow'd the flood. 
He pass'd the mark; and, wheeling, got before: 
Gyas blasphem'd the gods, devoutly swore, 
Cried out for anger, and his hair he tore. 
Mindless of others' lives (so high was grown 
His rising rage) and careless of his own, 
The trembling dotard to the deck he drew; 
Then hoisted up, and overboard he threw: 
This done, he seiz'd the helm; his fellows cheer'd, 
Turn'd short upon the shelfs, and madly steer'd. 
Hardly his head the plunging pilot rears, 
Clogg'd with his clothes, and cumber'd with his years: 
Now dropping wet, he climbs the cliff with pain. 
The crowd, that saw him fall and float again, 
Shout from the distant shore; and loudly laugh'd, 
To see his heaving breast disgorge the briny draught. 
The following Centaur, and the Dolphin's crew, 
Their vanish'd hopes of victory renew; 
While Gyas lags, they kindle in the race, 
To reach the mark. Sergesthus takes the place; 
Mnestheus pursues; and while around they wind, 
Comes up, not half his galley's length behind; 
Then, on the deck, amidst his mates appear'd, 
And thus their drooping courage he cheer'd: 
"My friends, and Hector's followers heretofore, 
Exert your vigor; tug the lab'ring oar; 
Stretch to your strokes, my still unconquer'd crew, 
Whom from the flaming walls of Troy I drew. 
In this, our common int'rest, let me find 
That strength of hand, that courage of the mind, 
As when you stemm'd the strong Malean flood, 
And o'er the Syrtes' broken billows row'd. 
I seek not now the foremost palm to gain; 
Tho' yet- but, ah! that haughty wish is vain! 
Let those enjoy it whom the gods ordain. 
But to be last, the lags of all the race!- 
Redeem yourselves and me from that disgrace." 
Now, one and all, they tug amain; they row 
At the full stretch, and shake the brazen prow. 
The sea beneath 'em sinks; their lab'ring sides 
Are swell'd, and sweat runs gutt'ring down in tides. 
Chance aids their daring with unhop'd success; 
Sergesthus, eager with his beak to press 
Betwixt the rival galley and the rock, 
Shuts up th' unwieldly Centaur in the lock. 
The vessel struck; and, with the dreadful shock, 
Her oars she shiver'd, and her head she broke. 
The trembling rowers from their banks arise, 
And, anxious for themselves, renounce the prize. 
With iron poles they heave her off the shores, 
And gather from the sea their floating oars. 
The crew of Mnestheus, with elated minds, 
Urge their success, and call the willing winds; 
Then ply their oars, and cut their liquid way 
In larger compass on the roomy sea. 
As, when the dove her rocky hold forsakes, 
Rous'd in a fright, her sounding wings she shakes; 
The cavern rings with clatt'ring; out she flies, 
And leaves her callow care, and cleaves the skies: 
At first she flutters; but at length she springs 
To smoother flight, and shoots upon her wings: 
So Mnestheus in the Dolphin cuts the sea; 
And, flying with a force, that force assists his way. 
Sergesthus in the Centaur soon he pass'd, 
Wedg'd in the rocky shoals, and sticking fast. 
In vain the victor he with cries implores, 
And practices to row with shatter'd oars. 
Then Mnestheus bears with Gyas, and outflies: 
The ship, without a pilot, yields the prize. 
Unvanquish'd Scylla now alone remains; 
Her he pursues, and all his vigor strains. 
Shouts from the fav'ring multitude arise; 
Applauding Echo to the shouts replies; 
Shouts, wishes, and applause run rattling thro' the skies.

These clamors with disdain the Scylla heard, 
Much grudg'd the praise, but more the robb'd reward: 
Resolv'd to hold their own, they mend their pace, 
All obstinate to die, or gain the race. 
Rais'd with success, the Dolphin swiftly ran; 
For they can conquer, who believe they can. 
Both urge their oars, and fortune both supplies, 
And both perhaps had shar'd an equal prize; 
When to the seas Cloanthus holds his hands, 
And succor from the wat'ry pow'rs demands: 
"Gods of the liquid realms, on which I row! 
If, giv'n by you, the laurel bind my brow, 
Assist to make me guilty of my vow! 
A snow-white bull shall on your shore be slain; 
His offer'd entrails cast into the main, 
And ruddy wine, from golden goblets thrown, 
Your grateful gift and my return shall own." 
The choir of nymphs, and Phorcus, from below, 
With virgin Panopea, heard his vow; 
And old Portunus, with his breadth of hand, 
Push'd on, and sped the galley to the land. 
Swift as a shaft, or winged wind, she flies, 
And, darting to the port, obtains the prize. 
The herald summons all, and then proclaims 
Cloanthus conqu'ror of the naval games. 
The prince with laurel crowns the victor's head, 
And three fat steers are to his vessel led, 
The ship's reward; with gen'rous wine beside, 
And sums of silver, which the crew divide. 
The leaders are distinguish'd from the rest; 
The victor honor'd with a nobler vest, 
Where gold and purple strive in equal rows, 
And needlework its happy cost bestows. 
There Ganymede is wrought with living art, 
Chasing thro' Ida's groves the trembling hart: 
Breathless he seems, yet eager to pursue; 
When from aloft descends, in open view, 
The bird of Jove, and, sousing on his prey, 
With crooked talons bears the boy away. 
In vain, with lifted hands and gazing eyes, 
His guards behold him soaring thro' the skies, 
And dogs pursue his flight with imitated cries. 
Mnestheus the second victor was declar'd; 
And, summon'd there, the second prize he shard. 
A coat of mail, brave Demoleus bore, 
More brave Aeneas from his shoulders tore, 
In single combat on the Trojan shore: 
This was ordain'd for Mnestheus to possess; 
In war for his defense, for ornament in peace. 
Rich was the gift, and glorious to behold, 
But yet so pond'rous with its plates of gold, 
That scarce two servants could the weight sustain; 
Yet, loaded thus, Demoleus o'er the plain 
Pursued and lightly seiz'd the Trojan train. 
The third, succeeding to the last reward, 
Two goodly bowls of massy silver shar'd, 
With figures prominent, and richly wrought, 
And two brass caldrons from Dodona brought. 
Thus all, rewarded by the hero's hands, 
Their conqu'ring temples bound with purple bands; 
And now Sergesthus, clearing from the rock, 
Brought back his galley shatter'd with the shock. 
Forlorn she look'd, without an aiding oar, 
And, houted by the vulgar, made to shore. 
As when a snake, surpris'd upon the road, 
Is crush'd athwart her body by the load 
Of heavy wheels; or with a mortal wound 
Her belly bruis'd, and trodden to the ground: 
In vain, with loosen'd curls, she crawls along; 
Yet, fierce above, she brandishes her tongue; 
Glares with her eyes, and bristles with her scales; 
But, groveling in the dust, her parts unsound she trails:

So slowly to the port the Centaur tends, 
But, what she wants in oars, with sails amends. 
Yet, for his galley sav'd, the grateful prince 
Is pleas'd th' unhappy chief to recompense. 
Pholoe, the Cretan slave, rewards his care, 
Beauteous herself, with lovely twins as fair. 
From thence his way the Trojan hero bent 
Into the neighb'ring plain, with mountains pent, 
Whose sides were shaded with surrounding wood. 
Full in the midst of this fair valley stood 
A native theater, which, rising slow 
By just degrees, o'erlook'd the ground below. 
High on a sylvan throne the leader sate; 
A num'rous train attend in solemn state. 
Here those that in the rapid course delight, 
Desire of honor and the prize invite. 
The rival runners without order stand; 
The Trojans mix'd with the Sicilian band. 
First Nisus, with Euryalus, appears; 
Euryalus a boy of blooming years, 
With sprightly grace and equal beauty crown'd; 
Nisus, for friendship to the youth renown'd. 
Diores next, of Priam's royal race, 
Then Salius joined with Patron, took their place; 
(But Patron in Arcadia had his birth, 
And Salius his from Arcananian earth;) 
Then two Sicilian youths- the names of these, 
Swift Helymus, and lovely Panopes: 
Both jolly huntsmen, both in forest bred, 
And owning old Acestes for their head; 
With sev'ral others of ignobler name, 
Whom time has not deliver'd o'er to fame. 
To these the hero thus his thoughts explain'd, 
In words which gen'ral approbation gain'd: 
"One common largess is for all design'd, 
(The vanquish'd and the victor shall be join'd,) 
Two darts of polish'd steel and Gnosian wood, 
A silver-studded ax, alike bestow'd. 
The foremost three have olive wreaths decreed: 
The first of these obtains a stately steed, 
Adorn'd with trappings; and the next in fame, 
The quiver of an Amazonian dame, 
With feather'd Thracian arrows well supplied: 
A golden belt shall gird his manly side, 
Which with a sparkling diamond shall be tied. 
The third this Grecian helmet shall content." 
He said. To their appointed base they went; 
With beating hearts th' expected sign receive, 
And, starting all at once, the barrier leave. 
Spread out, as on the winged winds, they flew, 
And seiz'd the distant goal with greedy view. 
Shot from the crowd, swift Nisus all o'erpass'd; 
Nor storms, nor thunder, equal half his haste. 
The next, but tho' the next, yet far disjoin'd, 
Came Salius, and Euryalus behind; 
Then Helymus, whom young Diores plied, 
Step after step, and almost side by side, 
His shoulders pressing; and, in longer space, 
Had won, or left at least a dubious race. 
Now, spent, the goal they almost reach at last, 
When eager Nisus, hapless in his haste, 
Slipp'd first, and, slipping, fell upon the plain, 
Soak'd with the blood of oxen newly slain. 
The careless victor had not mark'd his way; 
But, treading where the treach'rous puddle lay, 
His heels flew up; and on the grassy floor 
He fell, besmear'd with filth and holy gore. 
Not mindless then, Euryalus, of thee, 
Nor of the sacred bonds of amity, 
He strove th' immediate rival's hope to cross, 
And caught the foot of Salius as he rose. 
So Salius lay extended on the plain; 
Euryalus springs out, the prize to gain, 
And leaves the crowd: applauding peals attend 
The victor to the goal, who vanquish'd by his friend. 
Next Helymus; and then Diores came, 
By two misfortunes made the third in fame. 
But Salius enters, and, exclaiming loud 
For justice, deafens and disturbs the crowd; 
Urges his cause may in the court be heard; 
And pleads the prize is wrongfully conferr'd. 
But favor for Euryalus appears; 
His blooming beauty, with his tender tears, 
Had brib'd the judges for the promis'd prize. 
Besides, Diores fills the court with cries, 
Who vainly reaches at the last reward, 
If the first palm on Salius be conferr'd. 
Then thus the prince: "Let no disputes arise: 
Where fortune plac'd it, I award the prize. 
But fortune's errors give me leave to mend, 
At least to pity my deserving friend." 
He said, and, from among the spoils, he draws 
(Pond'rous with shaggy mane and golden paws) 
A lion's hide: to Salius this he gives. 
Nisus with envy sees the gift, and grieves. 
"If such rewards to vanquish'd men are due." 
He said, "and falling is to rise by you, 
What prize may Nisus from your bounty claim, 
Who merited the first rewards and fame? 
In falling, both an equal fortune tried; 
Would fortune for my fall so well provide!" 
With this he pointed to his face, and show'd 
His hand and all his habit smear'd with blood. 
Th' indulgent father of the people smil'd, 
And caus'd to be produc'd an ample shield, 
Of wondrous art, by Didymaon wrought, 
Long since from Neptune's bars in triumph brought. 
This giv'n to Nisus, he divides the rest, 
And equal justice in his gifts express'd. 
The race thus ended, and rewards bestow'd, 
Once more the princes bespeaks th' attentive crowd: 
"If there he here whose dauntless courage dare 
In gauntlet-fight, with limbs and body bare, 
His opposite sustain in open view, 
Stand forth the champion, and the games renew. 
Two prizes I propose, and thus divide: 
A bull with gilded horns, and fillets tied, 
Shall be the portion of the conqu'ring chief; 
A sword and helm shall cheer the loser's grief." 
Then haughty Dares in the lists appears; 
Stalking he strides, his head erected bears: 
His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield, 
And loud applauses echo thro' the field. 
Dares alone in combat us'd to stand 
The match of mighty Paris, hand to hand; 
The same, at Hector's fun'rals, undertook 
Gigantic Butes, of th' Amycian stock, 
And, by the stroke of his resistless hand, 
Stretch'd the vast bulk upon the yellow sand. 
Such Dares was; and such he strode along, 
And drew the wonder of the gazing throng. 
His brawny back and ample breast he shows, 
His lifted arms around his head he throws, 
And deals in whistling air his empty blows. 
His match is sought; but, thro' the trembling band, 
Not one dares answer to the proud demand. 
Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes 
Already he devours the promis'd prize. 
He claims the bull with awless insolence, 
And having seiz'd his horns, accosts the prince: 
"If none my matchless valor dares oppose, 
How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes? 
Permit me, chief, permit without delay, 
To lead this uncontended gift away." 
The crowd assents, and with redoubled cries 
For the proud challenger demands the prize. 
Acestes, fir'd with just disdain, to see 
The palm usurp'd without a victory, 
Reproach'd Entellus thus, who sate beside, 
And heard and saw, unmov'd, the Trojan's pride: 
"Once, but in vain, a champion of renown, 
So tamely can you bear the ravish'd crown, 
A prize in triumph borne before your sight, 
And shun, for fear, the danger of the fight? 
Where is our Eryx now, the boasted name, 
The god who taught your thund'ring arm the game? 
Where now your baffled honor? Where the spoil 
That fill'd your house, and fame that fill'd our isle?" 
Entellus, thus: "My soul is still the same, 
Unmov'd with fear, and mov'd with martial fame; 
But my chill blood is curdled in my veins, 
And scarce the shadow of a man remains. 
O could I turn to that fair prime again, 
That prime of which this boaster is so vain, 
The brave, who this decrepid age defies, 
Should feel my force, without the promis'd prize." 
He said; and, rising at the word, he threw 
Two pond'rous gauntlets down in open view; 
Gauntlets which Eryx wont in fight to wield, 
And sheathe his hands with in the listed field. 
With fear and wonder seiz'd, the crowd beholds 
The gloves of death, with sev'n distinguish'd folds 
Of tough bull hides; the space within is spread 
With iron, or with loads of heavy lead: 
Dares himself was daunted at the sight, 
Renounc'd his challenge, and refus'd to fight. 
Astonish'd at their weight, the hero stands, 
And pois'd the pond'rous engines in his hands. 
"What had your wonder," said Entellus, "been, 
Had you the gauntlets of Alcides seen, 
Or view'd the stern debate on this unhappy green! 
These which I bear your brother Eryx bore, 
Still mark'd with batter'd brains and mingled gore. 
With these he long sustain'd th' Herculean arm; 
And these I wielded while my blood was warm, 
This languish'd frame while better spirits fed, 
Ere age unstrung my nerves, or time o'ersnow'd my head. 
But if the challenger these arms refuse, 
And cannot wield their weight, or dare not use; 
If great Aeneas and Acestes join 
In his request, these gauntlets I resign; 
Let us with equal arms perform the fight, 
And let him leave to fear, since I resign my right." 
This said, Entellus for the strife prepares; 
Stripp'd of his quilted coat, his body bares; 
Compos'd of mighty bones and brawn he stands, 
A goodly tow'ring object on the sands. 
Then just Aeneas equal arms supplied, 
Which round their shoulders to their wrists they tied. 
Both on the tiptoe stand, at full extent, 
Their arms aloft, their bodies inly bent; 
Their heads from aiming blows they bear afar; 
With clashing gauntlets then provoke the war. 
One on his youth and pliant limbs relies; 
One on his sinews and his giant size. 
The last is stiff with age, his motion slow; 
He heaves for breath, he staggers to and fro, 
And clouds of issuing smoke his nostrils loudly blow. 
Yet equal in success, they ward, they strike; 
Their ways are diff'rent, but their art alike. 
Before, behind, the blows are dealt; around 
Their hollow sides the rattling thumps resound. 
A storm of strokes, well meant, with fury flies, 
And errs about their temples, ears, and eyes. 
Nor always errs; for oft the gauntlet draws 
A sweeping stroke along the crackling jaws. 
Heavy with age, Entellus stands his ground, 
But with his warping body wards the wound. 
His hand and watchful eye keep even pace; 
While Dares traverses and shifts his place, 
And, like a captain who beleaguers round 
Some strong-built castle on a rising ground, 
Views all th' approaches with observing eyes: 
This and that other part in vain he tries, 
And more on industry than force relies. 
With hands on high, Entellus threats the foe; 
But Dares watch'd the motion from below, 
And slipp'd aside, and shunn'd the long descending blow.

Entellus wastes his forces on the wind, 
And, thus deluded of the stroke design'd, 
Headlong and heavy fell; his ample breast 
And weighty limbs his ancient mother press'd. 
So falls a hollow pine, that long had stood 
On Ida's height, or Erymanthus' wood, 
Torn from the roots. The diff'ring nations rise, 
And shouts and mingled murmurs rend the skies, 
Acestus runs with eager haste, to raise 
The fall'n companion of his youthful days. 
Dauntless he rose, and to the fight return'd; 
With shame his glowing cheeks, his eyes with fury burn'd.

Disdain and conscious virtue fir'd his breast, 
And with redoubled force his foe he press'd. 
He lays on load with either hand, amain, 
And headlong drives the Trojan o'er the plain; 
Nor stops, nor stays; nor rest nor breath allows; 
But storms of strokes descend about his brows, 
A rattling tempest, and a hail of blows. 
But now the prince, who saw the wild increase 
Of wounds, commands the combatants to cease, 
And bounds Entellus' wrath, and bids the peace. 
First to the Trojan, spent with toil, he came, 
And sooth'd his sorrow for the suffer'd shame. 
"What fury seiz'd my friend? The gods," said he, 
"To him propitious, and averse to thee, 
Have giv'n his arm superior force to thine. 
'T is madness to contend with strength divine." 
The gauntlet fight thus ended, from the shore 
His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore: 
His mouth and nostrils pour'd a purple flood, 
And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood. 
Faintly he stagger'd thro' the hissing throng, 
And hung his head, and trail'd his legs along. 
The sword and casque are carried by his train; 
But with his foe the palm and ox remain. 
The champion, then, before Aeneas came, 
Proud of his prize, but prouder of his fame: 
"O goddess-born, and you, Dardanian host, 
Mark with attention, and forgive my boast; 
Learn what I was, by what remains; and know 
From what impending fate you sav'd my foe." 
Sternly he spoke, and then confronts the bull; 
And, on his ample forehead aiming full, 
The deadly stroke, descending, pierc'd the skull. 
Down drops the beast, nor needs a second wound, 
But sprawls in pangs of death, and spurns the ground. 
Then, thus: "In Dares' stead I offer this. 
Eryx, accept a nobler sacrifice; 
Take the last gift my wither'd arms can yield: 
Thy gauntlets I resign, and here renounce the field." 
This done, Aeneas orders, for the close, 
The strife of archers with contending bows. 
The mast Sergesthus' shatter'd galley bore 
With his own hands he raises on the shore. 
A flutt'ring dove upon the top they tie, 
The living mark at which their arrows fly. 
The rival archers in a line advance, 
Their turn of shooting to receive from chance. 
A helmet holds their names; the lots are drawn: 
On the first scroll was read Hippocoon. 
The people shout. Upon the next was found 
Young Mnestheus, late with naval honors crown'd. 
The third contain'd Eurytion's noble name, 
Thy brother, Pandarus, and next in fame, 
Whom Pallas urg'd the treaty to confound, 
And send among the Greeks a feather'd wound. 
Acestes in the bottom last remain'd, 
Whom not his age from youthful sports restrain'd. 
Soon all with vigor bend their trusty bows, 
And from the quiver each his arrow chose. 
Hippocoon's was the first: with forceful sway 
It flew, and, whizzing, cut the liquid way. 
Fix'd in the mast the feather'd weapon stands: 
The fearful pigeon flutters in her bands, 
And the tree trembled, and the shouting cries 
Of the pleas'd people rend the vaulted skies. 
Then Mnestheus to the head his arrow drove, 
With lifted eyes, and took his aim above, 
But made a glancing shot, and missed the dove; 
Yet miss'd so narrow, that he cut the cord 
Which fasten'd by the foot the flitting bird. 
The captive thus releas'd, away she flies, 
And beats with clapping wings the yielding skies. 
His bow already bent, Eurytion stood; 
And, having first invok'd his brother god, 
His winged shaft with eager haste he sped. 
The fatal message reach'd her as she fled: 
She leaves her life aloft; she strikes the ground, 
And renders back the weapon in the wound. 
Acestes, grudging at his lot, remains, 
Without a prize to gratify his pains. 
Yet, shooting upward, sends his shaft, to show 
An archer's art, and boast his twanging bow. 
The feather'd arrow gave a dire portent, 
And latter augurs judge from this event. 
Chaf'd by the speed, it fir'd; and, as it flew, 
A trail of following flames ascending drew: 
Kindling they mount, and mark the shiny way; 
Across the skies as falling meteors play, 
And vanish into wind, or in a blaze decay. 
The Trojans and Sicilians wildly stare, 
And, trembling, turn their wonder into pray'r. 
The Dardan prince put on a smiling face, 
And strain'd Acestes with a close embrace; 
Then, hon'ring him with gifts above the rest, 
Turn'd the bad omen, nor his fears confess'd. 
"The gods," said he, "this miracle have wrought, 
And order'd you the prize without the lot. 
Accept this goblet, rough with figur'd gold, 
Which Thracian Cisseus gave my sire of old: 
This pledge of ancient amity receive, 
Which to my second sire I justly give." 
He said, and, with the trumpets' cheerful sound, 
Proclaim'd him victor, and with laurel-crown'd. 
Nor good Eurytion envied him the prize, 
Tho' he transfix'd the pigeon in the skies. 
Who cut the line, with second gifts was grac'd; 
The third was his whose arrow pierc'd the mast. 
The chief, before the games were wholly done, 
Call'd Periphantes, tutor to his son, 
And whisper'd thus: "With speed Ascanius find; 
And, if his childish troop be ready join'd, 
On horseback let him grace his grandsire's day, 
And lead his equals arm'd in just array." 
He said; and, calling out, the cirque he clears. 
The crowd withdrawn, an open plain appears. 
And now the noble youths, of form divine, 
Advance before their fathers, in a line; 
The riders grace the steeds; the steeds with glory shine.

Thus marching on in military pride, 
Shouts of applause resound from side to side. 
Their casques adorn'd with laurel wreaths they wear, 
Each brandishing aloft a cornel spear. 
Some at their backs their gilded quivers bore; 
Their chains of burnish'd gold hung down before. 
Three graceful troops they form'd upon the green; 
Three graceful leaders at their head were seen; 
Twelve follow'd ev'ry chief, and left a space between. 
The first young Priam led; a lovely boy, 
Whose grandsire was th' unhappy king of Troy; 
His race in after times was known to fame, 
New honors adding to the Latian name; 
And well the royal boy his Thracian steed became. 
White were the fetlocks of his feet before, 
And on his front a snowy star he bore. 
Then beauteous Atys, with Iulus bred, 
Of equal age, the second squadron led. 
The last in order, but the first in place, 
First in the lovely features of his face, 
Rode fair Ascanius on a fiery steed, 
Queen Dido's gift, and of the Tyrian breed. 
Sure coursers for the rest the king ordains, 
With golden bits adorn'd, and purple reins. 
The pleas'd spectators peals of shouts renew, 
And all the parents in the children view; 
Their make, their motions, and their sprightly grace, 
And hopes and fears alternate in their face. 
Th' unfledg'd commanders and their martial train 
First make the circuit of the sandy plain 
Around their sires, and, at th' appointed sign, 
Drawn up in beauteous order, form a line. 
The second signal sounds, the troop divides 
In three distinguish'd parts, with three distinguish'd guides

Again they close, and once again disjoin; 
In troop to troop oppos'd, and line to line. 
They meet; they wheel; they throw their darts afar 
With harmless rage and well-dissembled war. 
Then in a round the mingled bodies run: 
Flying they follow, and pursuing shun; 
Broken, they break; and, rallying, they renew 
In other forms the military shew. 
At last, in order, undiscern'd they join, 
And march together in a friendly line. 
And, as the Cretan labyrinth of old, 
With wand'ring ways and many a winding fold, 
Involv'd the weary feet, without redress, 
In a round error, which denied recess; 
So fought the Trojan boys in warlike play, 
Turn'd and return'd, and still a diff'rent way. 
Thus dolphins in the deep each other chase 
In circles, when they swim around the wat'ry race. 
This game, these carousels, Ascanius taught; 
And, building Alba, to the Latins brought; 
Shew'd what he learn'd: the Latin sires impart 
To their succeeding sons the graceful art; 
From these imperial Rome receiv'd the game, 
Which Troy, the youths the Trojan troop, they name. 
Thus far the sacred sports they celebrate: 
But Fortune soon resum'd her ancient hate; 
For, while they pay the dead his annual dues, 
Those envied rites Saturnian Juno views; 
And sends the goddess of the various bow, 
To try new methods of revenge below; 
Supplies the winds to wing her airy way, 
Where in the port secure the navy lay. 
Swiftly fair Iris down her arch descends, 
And, undiscern'd, her fatal voyage ends. 
She saw the gath'ring crowd; and, gliding thence, 
The desart shore, and fleet without defense. 
The Trojan matrons, on the sands alone, 
With sighs and tears Anchises' death bemoan; 
Then, turning to the sea their weeping eyes, 
Their pity to themselves renews their cries. 
"Alas!" said one, "what oceans yet remain 
For us to sail! what labors to sustain!" 
All take the word, and, with a gen'ral groan, 
Implore the gods for peace, and places of their own. 
The goddess, great in mischief, views their pains, 
And in a woman's form her heav'nly limbs restrains. 
In face and shape old Beroe she became, 
Doryclus' wife, a venerable dame, 
Once blest with riches, and a mother's name. 
Thus chang'd, amidst the crying crowd she ran, 
Mix'd with the matrons, and these words began: 
"O wretched we, whom not the Grecian pow'r, 
Nor flames, destroy'd, in Troy's unhappy hour! 
O wretched we, reserv'd by cruel fate, 
Beyond the ruins of the sinking state! 
Now sev'n revolving years are wholly run, 
Since this improsp'rous voyage we begun; 
Since, toss'd from shores to shores, from lands to lands,

Inhospitable rocks and barren sands, 
Wand'ring in exile thro' the stormy sea, 
We search in vain for flying Italy. 
Now cast by fortune on this kindred land, 
What should our rest and rising walls withstand, 
Or hinder here to fix our banish'd band? 
O country lost, and gods redeem'd in vain, 
If still in endless exile we remain! 
Shall we no more the Trojan walls renew, 
Or streams of some dissembled Simois view! 
Haste, join with me, th' unhappy fleet consume! 
Cassandra bids; and I declare her doom. 
In sleep I saw her; she supplied my hands 
(For this I more than dreamt) with flaming brands: 
'With these,' said she, 'these wand'ring ships destroy: 
These are your fatal seats, and this your Troy.' 
Time calls you now; the precious hour employ: 
Slack not the good presage, while Heav'n inspires 
Our minds to dare, and gives the ready fires. 
See! Neptune's altars minister their brands: 
The god is pleas'd; the god supplies our hands." 
Then from the pile a flaming fire she drew, 
And, toss'd in air, amidst the galleys threw. 
Wrapp'd in amaze, the matrons wildly stare: 
Then Pyrgo, reverenc'd for her hoary hair, 
Pyrgo, the nurse of Priam's num'rous race: 
"No Beroe this, tho' she belies her face! 
What terrors from her frowning front arise! 
Behold a goddess in her ardent eyes! 
What rays around her heav'nly face are seen! 
Mark her majestic voice, and more than mortal mien! 
Beroe but now I left, whom, pin'd with pain, 
Her age and anguish from these rites detain," 
She said. The matrons, seiz'd with new amaze, 
Roll their malignant eyes, and on the navy gaze. 
They fear, and hope, and neither part obey: 
They hope the fated land, but fear the fatal way. 
The goddess, having done her task below, 
Mounts up on equal wings, and bends her painted bow. 
Struck with the sight, and seiz'd with rage divine, 
The matrons prosecute their mad design: 
They shriek aloud; they snatch, with impious hands, 
The food of altars; fires and flaming brands. 
Green boughs and saplings, mingled in their haste, 
And smoking torches, on the ships they cast. 
The flame, unstopp'd at first, more fury gains, 
And Vulcan rides at large with loosen'd reins: 
Triumphant to the painted sterns he soars, 
And seizes, in this way, the banks and crackling oars. 
Eumelus was the first the news to bear, 
While yet they crowd the rural theater. 
Then, what they hear, is witness'd by their eyes: 
A storm of sparkles and of flames arise. 
Ascanius took th' alarm, while yet he led 
His early warriors on his prancing steed, 
And, spurring on, his equals soon o'erpass'd; 
Nor could his frighted friends reclaim his haste. 
Soon as the royal youth appear'd in view, 
He sent his voice before him as he flew: 
"What madness moves you, matrons, to destroy 
The last remainders of unhappy Troy! 
Not hostile fleets, but your own hopes, you burn, 
And on your friends your fatal fury turn. 
Behold your own Ascanius!" While he said, 
He drew his glitt'ring helmet from his head, 
In which the youths to sportful arms he led. 
By this, Aeneas and his train appear; 
And now the women, seiz'd with shame and fear, 
Dispers'd, to woods and caverns take their flight, 
Abhor their actions, and avoid the light; 
Their friends acknowledge, and their error find, 
And shake the goddess from their alter'd mind. 
Not so the raging fires their fury cease, 
But, lurking in the seams, with seeming peace, 
Work on their way amid the smold'ring tow, 
Sure in destruction, but in motion slow. 
The silent plague thro' the green timber eats, 
And vomits out a tardy flame by fits. 
Down to the keels, and upward to the sails, 
The fire descends, or mounts, but still prevails; 
Nor buckets pour'd, nor strength of human hand, 
Can the victorious element withstand. 
The pious hero rends his robe, and throws 
To heav'n his hands, and with his hands his vows. 
"O Jove," he cried, "if pray'rs can yet have place; 
If thou abhorr'st not all the Dardan race; 
If any spark of pity still remain; 
If gods are gods, and not invok'd in vain; 
Yet spare the relics of the Trojan train! 
Yet from the flames our burning vessels free, 
Or let thy fury fall alone on me! 
At this devoted head thy thunder throw, 
And send the willing sacrifice below!" 
Scarce had he said, when southern storms arise: 
From pole to pole the forky lightning flies; 
Loud rattling shakes the mountains and the plain; 
Heav'n bellies downward, and descends in rain. 
Whole sheets of water from the clouds are sent, 
Which, hissing thro' the planks, the flames prevent, 
And stop the fiery pest. Four ships alone 
Burn to the waist, and for the fleet atone. 
But doubtful thoughts the hero's heart divide; 
If he should still in Sicily reside, 
Forgetful of his fates, or tempt the main, 
In hope the promis'd Italy to gain. 
Then Nautes, old and wise, to whom alone 
The will of Heav'n by Pallas was foreshown; 
Vers'd in portents, experienc'd, and inspir'd 
To tell events, and what the fates requir'd; 
Thus while he stood, to neither part inclin'd, 
With cheerful words reliev'd his lab'ring mind: 
"O goddess-born, resign'd in ev'ry state, 
With patience bear, with prudence push your fate. 
By suff'ring well, our Fortune we subdue; 
Fly when she frowns, and, when she calls, pursue. 
Your friend Acestes is of Trojan kind; 
To him disclose the secrets of your mind: 
Trust in his hands your old and useless train; 
Too num'rous for the ships which yet remain: 
The feeble, old, indulgent of their ease, 
The dames who dread the dangers of the seas, 
With all the dastard crew, who dare not stand 
The shock of battle with your foes by land. 
Here you may build a common town for all, 
And, from Acestes' name, Acesta call." 
The reasons, with his friend's experience join'd, 
Encourag'd much, but more disturb'd his mind. 
'T was dead of night; when to his slumb'ring eyes 
His father's shade descended from the skies, 
And thus he spoke: "O more than vital breath, 
Lov'd while I liv'd, and dear ev'n after death; 
O son, in various toils and troubles toss'd, 
The King of Heav'n employs my careful ghost 
On his commands: the god, who sav'd from fire 
Your flaming fleet, and heard your just desire. 
The wholesome counsel of your friend receive, 
And here the coward train and woman leave: 
The chosen youth, and those who nobly dare, 
Transport, to tempt the dangers of the war. 
The stern Italians will their courage try; 
Rough are their manners, and their minds are high. 
But first to Pluto's palace you shall go, 
And seek my shade among the blest below: 
For not with impious ghosts my soul remains, 
Nor suffers with the damn'd perpetual pains, 
But breathes the living air of soft Elysian plains. 
The chaste Sibylla shall your steps convey, 
And blood of offer'd victims free the way. 
There shall you know what realms the gods assign, 
And learn the fates and fortunes of your line. 
But now, farewell! I vanish with the night, 
And feel the blast of heav'n's approaching light." 
He said, and mix'd with shades, and took his airy flight.

"Whither so fast?" the filial duty cried; 
"And why, ah why, the wish'd embrace denied?" 
He said, and rose; as holy zeal inspires, 
He rakes hot embers, and renews the fires; 
His country gods and Vesta then adores 
With cakes and incense, and their aid implores. 
Next, for his friends and royal host he sent, 
Reveal'd his vision, and the gods' intent, 
With his own purpose. All, without delay, 
The will of Jove, and his desires obey. 
They list with women each degenerate name, 
Who dares not hazard life for future fame. 
These they cashier: the brave remaining few, 
Oars, banks, and cables, half consum'd, renew. 
The prince designs a city with the plow; 
The lots their sev'ral tenements allow. 
This part is nam'd from Ilium, that from Troy, 
And the new king ascends the throne with joy; 
A chosen senate from the people draws; 
Appoints the judges, and ordains the laws. 
Then, on the top of Eryx, they begin 
A rising temple to the Paphian queen. 
Anchises, last, is honor'd as a god; 
A priest is added, annual gifts bestow'd, 
And groves are planted round his blest abode. 
Nine days they pass in feasts, their temples crown'd; 
And fumes of incense in the fanes abound. 
Then from the south arose a gentle breeze 
That curl'd the smoothness of the glassy seas; 
The rising winds a ruffling gale afford, 
And call the merry mariners aboard. 
Now loud laments along the shores resound, 
Of parting friends in close embraces bound. 
The trembling women, the degenerate train, 
Who shunn'd the frightful dangers of the main, 
Ev'n those desire to sail, and take their share 
Of the rough passage and the promis'd war: 
Whom good Aeneas cheers, and recommends 
To their new master's care his fearful friends. 
On Eryx's altars three fat calves he lays; 
A lamb new-fallen to the stormy seas; 
Then slips his haulsers, and his anchors weighs. 
High on the deck the godlike hero stands, 
With olive crown'd, a charger in his hands; 
Then cast the reeking entrails in the brine, 
And pour'd the sacrifice of purple wine. 
Fresh gales arise; with equal strokes they vie, 
And brush the buxom seas, and o'er the billows fly. 
Meantime the mother goddess, full of fears, 
To Neptune thus address'd, with tender tears: 
"The pride of Jove's imperious queen, the rage, 
The malice which no suff'rings can assuage, 
Compel me to these pray'rs; since neither fate, 
Nor time, nor pity, can remove her hate: 
Ev'n Jove is thwarted by his haughty wife; 
Still vanquish'd, yet she still renews the strife. 
As if 't were little to consume the town 
Which aw'd the world, and wore th' imperial crown, 
She prosecutes the ghost of Troy with pains, 
And gnaws, ev'n to the bones, the last remains. 
Let her the causes of her hatred tell; 
But you can witness its effects too well. 
You saw the storm she rais'd on Libyan floods, 
That mix'd the mounting billows with the clouds; 
When, bribing Aeolus, she shook the main, 
And mov'd rebellion in your wat'ry reign. 
With fury she possess'd the Dardan dames, 
To burn their fleet with execrable flames, 
And forc'd Aeneas, when his ships were lost, 
To leave his foll'wers on a foreign coast. 
For what remains, your godhead I implore, 
And trust my son to your protecting pow'r. 
If neither Jove's nor Fate's decree withstand, 
Secure his passage to the Latian land." 
Then thus the mighty Ruler of the Main: 
"What may not Venus hope from Neptune's reign? 
My kingdom claims your birth; my late defense 
Of your indanger'd fleet may claim your confidence. 
Nor less by land than sea my deeds declare 
How much your lov'd Aeneas is my care. 
Thee, Xanthus, and thee, Simois, I attest. 
Your Trojan troops when proud Achilles press'd, 
And drove before him headlong on the plain, 
And dash'd against the walls the trembling train; 
When floods were fill'd with bodies of the slain; 
When crimson Xanthus, doubtful of his way, 
Stood up on ridges to behold the sea; 
(New heaps came tumbling in, and chok'd his way;) 
When your Aeneas fought, but fought with odds 
Of force unequal, and unequal gods; 
I spread a cloud before the victor's sight, 
Sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secur'd his flight; 
Ev'n then secur'd him, when I sought with joy 
The vow'd destruction of ungrateful Troy. 
My will's the same: fair goddess, fear no more, 
Your fleet shall safely gain the Latian shore; 
Their lives are giv'n; one destin'd head alone 
Shall perish, and for multitudes atone." 
Thus having arm'd with hopes her anxious mind, 
His finny team Saturnian Neptune join'd, 
Then adds the foamy bridle to their jaws, 
And to the loosen'd reins permits the laws. 
High on the waves his azure car he guides; 
Its axles thunder, and the sea subsides, 
And the smooth ocean rolls her silent tides. 
The tempests fly before their father's face, 
Trains of inferior gods his triumph grace, 
And monster whales before their master play, 
And choirs of Tritons crowd the wat'ry way. 
The marshal'd pow'rs in equal troops divide 
To right and left; the gods his better side 
Inclose, and on the worse the Nymphs and Nereids ride. 
Now smiling hope, with sweet vicissitude, 
Within the hero's mind his joys renew'd. 
He calls to raise the masts, the sheets display; 
The cheerful crew with diligence obey; 
They scud before the wind, and sail in open sea. 
Ahead of all the master pilot steers; 
And, as he leads, the following navy veers. 
The steeds of Night had travel'd half the sky, 
The drowsy rowers on their benches lie, 
When the soft God of Sleep, with easy flight, 
Descends, and draws behind a trail of light. 
Thou, Palinurus, art his destin'd prey; 
To thee alone he takes his fatal way. 
Dire dreams to thee, and iron sleep, he bears; 
And, lighting on thy prow, the form of Phorbas wears. 
Then thus the traitor god began his tale: 
"The winds, my friend, inspire a pleasing gale; 
The ships, without thy care, securely sail. 
Now steal an hour of sweet repose; and I 
Will take the rudder and thy room supply." 
To whom the yawning pilot, half asleep: 
"Me dost thou bid to trust the treach'rous deep, 
The harlot smiles of her dissembling face, 
And to her faith commit the Trojan race? 
Shall I believe the Siren South again, 
And, oft betray'd, not know the monster main?" 
He said: his fasten'd hands the rudder keep, 
And, fix'd on heav'n, his eyes repel invading sleep. 
The god was wroth, and at his temples threw 
A branch in Lethe dipp'd, and drunk with Stygian dew: 
The pilot, vanquish'd by the pow'r divine, 
Soon clos'd his swimming eyes, and lay supine. 
Scarce were his limbs extended at their length, 
The god, insulting with superior strength, 
Fell heavy on him, plung'd him in the sea, 
And, with the stern, the rudder tore away. 
Headlong he fell, and, struggling in the main, 
Cried out for helping hands, but cried in vain. 
The victor daemon mounts obscure in air, 
While the ship sails without the pilot's care. 
On Neptune's faith the floating fleet relies; 
But what the man forsook, the god supplies, 
And o'er the dang'rous deep secure the navy flies; 
Glides by the Sirens' cliffs, a shelfy coast, 
Long infamous for ships and sailors lost, 
And white with bones. Th' impetuous ocean roars, 
And rocks rebellow from the sounding shores. 
The watchful hero felt the knocks, and found 
The tossing vessel sail'd on shoaly ground. 
Sure of his pilot's loss, he takes himself 
The helm, and steers aloof, and shuns the shelf. 
Inly he griev'd, and, groaning from the breast, 
Deplor'd his death; and thus his pain express'd: 
"For faith repos'd on seas, and on the flatt'ring sky, 
Thy naked corpse is doom'd on shores unknown to lie." 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VI

He said, and wept; then spread his sails before 
The winds, and reach'd at length the Cumaean shore: 
Their anchors dropp'd, his crew the vessels moor. 
They turn their heads to sea, their sterns to land, 
And greet with greedy joy th' Italian strand. 
Some strike from clashing flints their fiery seed; 
Some gather sticks, the kindled flames to feed, 
Or search for hollow trees, and fell the woods, 
Or trace thro' valleys the discover'd floods. 
Thus, while their sev'ral charges they fulfil, 
The pious prince ascends the sacred hill 
Where Phoebus is ador'd; and seeks the shade 
Which hides from sight his venerable maid. 
Deep in a cave the Sibyl makes abode; 
Thence full of fate returns, and of the god. 
Thro' Trivia's grove they walk; and now behold, 
And enter now, the temple roof'd with gold. 
When Daedalus, to fly the Cretan shore, 
His heavy limbs on jointed pinions bore, 
(The first who sail'd in air,) 't is sung by Fame, 
To the Cumaean coast at length he came, 
And here alighting, built this costly frame. 
Inscrib'd to Phoebus, here he hung on high 
The steerage of his wings, that cut the sky: 
Then o'er the lofty gate his art emboss'd 
Androgeos' death, and off'rings to his ghost; 
Sev'n youths from Athens yearly sent, to meet 
The fate appointed by revengeful Crete. 
And next to those the dreadful urn was plac'd, 
In which the destin'd names by lots were cast: 
The mournful parents stand around in tears, 
And rising Crete against their shore appears. 
There too, in living sculpture, might be seen 
The mad affection of the Cretan queen; 
Then how she cheats her bellowing lover's eye; 
The rushing leap, the doubtful progeny, 
The lower part a beast, a man above, 
The monument of their polluted love. 
Not far from thence he grav'd the wondrous maze, 
A thousand doors, a thousand winding ways: 
Here dwells the monster, hid from human view, 
Not to be found, but by the faithful clew; 
Till the kind artist, mov'd with pious grief, 
Lent to the loving maid this last relief, 
And all those erring paths describ'd so well 
That Theseus conquer'd and the monster fell. 
Here hapless Icarus had found his part, 
Had not the father's grief restrain'd his art. 
He twice assay'd to cast his son in gold; 
Twice from his hands he dropp'd the forming mold. 
All this with wond'ring eyes Aeneas view'd; 
Each varying object his delight renew'd: 
Eager to read the rest- Achates came, 
And by his side the mad divining dame, 
The priestess of the god, Deiphobe her name. 
"Time suffers not," she said, "to feed your eyes 
With empty pleasures; haste the sacrifice. 
Sev'n bullocks, yet unyok'd, for Phoebus choose, 
And for Diana sev'n unspotted ewes." 
This said, the servants urge the sacred rites, 
While to the temple she the prince invites. 
A spacious cave, within its farmost part, 
Was hew'd and fashion'd by laborious art 
Thro' the hill's hollow sides: before the place, 
A hundred doors a hundred entries grace; 
As many voices issue, and the sound 
Of Sybil's words as many times rebound. 
Now to the mouth they come. Aloud she cries: 
"This is the time; enquire your destinies. 
He comes; behold the god!" Thus while she said, 
(And shiv'ring at the sacred entry stay'd,) 
Her color chang'd; her face was not the same, 
And hollow groans from her deep spirit came. 
Her hair stood up; convulsive rage possess'd 
Her trembling limbs, and heav'd her lab'ring breast. 
Greater than humankind she seem'd to look, 
And with an accent more than mortal spoke. 
Her staring eyes with sparkling fury roll; 
When all the god came rushing on her soul. 
Swiftly she turn'd, and, foaming as she spoke: 
"Why this delay?" she cried- "the pow'rs invoke! 
Thy pray'rs alone can open this abode; 
Else vain are my demands, and dumb the god." 
She said no more. The trembling Trojans hear, 
O'erspread with a damp sweat and holy fear. 
The prince himself, with awful dread possess'd, 
His vows to great Apollo thus address'd: 
"Indulgent god, propitious pow'r to Troy, 
Swift to relieve, unwilling to destroy, 
Directed by whose hand the Dardan dart 
Pierc'd the proud Grecian's only mortal part: 
Thus far, by fate's decrees and thy commands, 
Thro' ambient seas and thro' devouring sands, 
Our exil'd crew has sought th' Ausonian ground; 
And now, at length, the flying coast is found. 
Thus far the fate of Troy, from place to place, 
With fury has pursued her wand'ring race. 
Here cease, ye pow'rs, and let your vengeance end: 
Troy is no more, and can no more offend. 
And thou, O sacred maid, inspir'd to see 
Th' event of things in dark futurity; 
Give me what Heav'n has promis'd to my fate, 
To conquer and command the Latian state; 
To fix my wand'ring gods, and find a place 
For the long exiles of the Trojan race. 
Then shall my grateful hands a temple rear 
To the twin gods, with vows and solemn pray'r; 
And annual rites, and festivals, and games, 
Shall be perform'd to their auspicious names. 
Nor shalt thou want thy honors in my land; 
For there thy faithful oracles shall stand, 
Preserv'd in shrines; and ev'ry sacred lay, 
Which, by thy mouth, Apollo shall convey: 
All shall be treasur'd by a chosen train 
Of holy priests, and ever shall remain. 
But O! commit not thy prophetic mind 
To flitting leaves, the sport of ev'ry wind, 
Lest they disperse in air our empty fate; 
Write not, but, what the pow'rs ordain, relate." 
Struggling in vain, impatient of her load, 
And lab'ring underneath the pond'rous god, 
The more she strove to shake him from her breast, 
With more and far superior force he press'd; 
Commands his entrance, and, without control, 
Usurps her organs and inspires her soul. 
Now, with a furious blast, the hundred doors 
Ope of themselves; a rushing whirlwind roars 
Within the cave, and Sibyl's voice restores: 
"Escap'd the dangers of the wat'ry reign, 
Yet more and greater ills by land remain. 
The coast, so long desir'd (nor doubt th' event), 
Thy troops shall reach, but, having reach'd, repent. 
Wars, horrid wars, I view- a field of blood, 
And Tiber rolling with a purple flood. 
Simois nor Xanthus shall be wanting there: 
A new Achilles shall in arms appear, 
And he, too, goddess-born. Fierce Juno's hate, 
Added to hostile force, shall urge thy fate. 
To what strange nations shalt not thou resort, 
Driv'n to solicit aid at ev'ry court! 
The cause the same which Ilium once oppress'd; 
A foreign mistress, and a foreign guest. 
But thou, secure of soul, unbent with woes, 
The more thy fortune frowns, the more oppose. 
The dawnings of thy safety shall be shown 
From whence thou least shalt hope, a Grecian town." 
Thus, from the dark recess, the Sibyl spoke, 
And the resisting air the thunder broke; 
The cave rebellow'd, and the temple shook. 
Th' ambiguous god, who rul'd her lab'ring breast, 
In these mysterious words his mind express'd; 
Some truths reveal'd, in terms involv'd the rest. 
At length her fury fell, her foaming ceas'd, 
And, ebbing in her soul, the god decreas'd. 
Then thus the chief: "No terror to my view, 
No frightful face of danger can be new. 
Inur'd to suffer, and resolv'd to dare, 
The Fates, without my pow'r, shall be without my care. 
This let me crave, since near your grove the road 
To hell lies open, and the dark abode 
Which Acheron surrounds, th' innavigable flood; 
Conduct me thro' the regions void of light, 
And lead me longing to my father's sight. 
For him, a thousand dangers I have sought, 
And, rushing where the thickest Grecians fought, 
Safe on my back the sacred burthen brought. 
He, for my sake, the raging ocean tried, 
And wrath of Heav'n, my still auspicious guide, 
And bore beyond the strength decrepid age supplied. 
Oft, since he breath'd his last, in dead of night 
His reverend image stood before my sight; 
Enjoin'd to seek, below, his holy shade; 
Conducted there by your unerring aid. 
But you, if pious minds by pray'rs are won, 
Oblige the father, and protect the son. 
Yours is the pow'r; nor Proserpine in vain 
Has made you priestess of her nightly reign. 
If Orpheus, arm'd with his enchanting lyre, 
The ruthless king with pity could inspire, 
And from the shades below redeem his wife; 
If Pollux, off'ring his alternate life, 
Could free his brother, and can daily go 
By turns aloft, by turns descend below- 
Why name I Theseus, or his greater friend, 
Who trod the downward path, and upward could ascend? 
Not less than theirs from Jove my lineage came; 
My mother greater, my descent the same." 
So pray'd the Trojan prince, and, while he pray'd, 
His hand upon the holy altar laid. 
Then thus replied the prophetess divine: 
"O goddess-born of great Anchises' line, 
The gates of hell are open night and day; 
Smooth the descent, and easy is the way: 
But to return, and view the cheerful skies, 
In this the task and mighty labor lies. 
To few great Jupiter imparts this grace, 
And those of shining worth and heav'nly race. 
Betwixt those regions and our upper light, 
Deep forests and impenetrable night 
Possess the middle space: th' infernal bounds 
Cocytus, with his sable waves, surrounds. 
But if so dire a love your soul invades, 
As twice below to view the trembling shades; 
If you so hard a toil will undertake, 
As twice to pass th' innavigable lake; 
Receive my counsel. In the neighb'ring grove 
There stands a tree; the queen of Stygian Jove 
Claims it her own; thick woods and gloomy night 
Conceal the happy plant from human sight. 
One bough it bears; but (wondrous to behold!) 
The ductile rind and leaves of radiant gold: 
This from the vulgar branches must be torn, 
And to fair Proserpine the present borne, 
Ere leave be giv'n to tempt the nether skies. 
The first thus rent a second will arise, 
And the same metal the same room supplies. 
Look round the wood, with lifted eyes, to see 
The lurking gold upon the fatal tree: 
Then rend it off, as holy rites command; 
The willing metal will obey thy hand, 
Following with ease, if favor'd by thy fate, 
Thou art foredoom'd to view the Stygian state: 
If not, no labor can the tree constrain; 
And strength of stubborn arms and steel are vain. 
Besides, you know not, while you here attend, 
Th' unworthy fate of your unhappy friend: 
Breathless he lies; and his unburied ghost, 
Depriv'd of fun'ral rites, pollutes your host. 
Pay first his pious dues; and, for the dead, 
Two sable sheep around his hearse be led; 
Then, living turfs upon his body lay: 
This done, securely take the destin'd way, 
To find the regions destitute of day." 
She said, and held her peace. Aeneas went 
Sad from the cave, and full of discontent, 
Unknowing whom the sacred Sibyl meant. 
Achates, the companion of his breast, 
Goes grieving by his side, with equal cares oppress'd. 
Walking, they talk'd, and fruitlessly divin'd 
What friend the priestess by those words design'd. 
But soon they found an object to deplore: 
Misenus lay extended the shore; 
Son of the God of Winds: none so renown'd 
The warrior trumpet in the field to sound; 
With breathing brass to kindle fierce alarms, 
And rouse to dare their fate in honorable arms. 
He serv'd great Hector, and was ever near, 
Not with his trumpet only, but his spear. 
But by Pelides' arms when Hector fell, 
He chose Aeneas; and he chose as well. 
Swoln with applause, and aiming still at more, 
He now provokes the sea gods from the shore; 
With envy Triton heard the martial sound, 
And the bold champion, for his challenge, drown'd; 
Then cast his mangled carcass on the strand: 
The gazing crowd around the body stand. 
All weep; but most Aeneas mourns his fate, 
And hastens to perform the funeral state. 
In altar-wise, a stately pile they rear; 
The basis broad below, and top advanc'd in air. 
An ancient wood, fit for the work design'd, 
(The shady covert of the salvage kind,) 
The Trojans found: the sounding ax is plied; 
Firs, pines, and pitch trees, and the tow'ring pride 
Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke, 
And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak. 
Huge trunks of trees, fell'd from the steepy crown 
Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down. 
Arm'd like the rest the Trojan prince appears, 
And by his pious labor urges theirs. 
Thus while he wrought, revolving in his mind 
The ways to compass what his wish design'd, 
He cast his eyes upon the gloomy grove, 
And then with vows implor'd the Queen of Love: 
"O may thy pow'r, propitious still to me, 
Conduct my steps to find the fatal tree, 
In this deep forest; since the Sibyl's breath 
Foretold, alas! too true, Misenus' death." 
Scarce had he said, when, full before his sight, 
Two doves, descending from their airy flight, 
Secure upon the grassy plain alight. 
He knew his mother's birds; and thus he pray'd: 
"Be you my guides, with your auspicious aid, 
And lead my footsteps, till the branch be found, 
Whose glitt'ring shadow gilds the sacred ground. 
And thou, great parent, with celestial care, 
In this distress be present to my pray'r!" 
Thus having said, he stopp'd with watchful sight, 
Observing still the motions of their flight, 
What course they took, what happy signs they shew. 
They fed, and, flutt'ring, by degrees withdrew 
Still farther from the place, but still in view: 
Hopping and flying, thus they led him on 
To the slow lake, whose baleful stench to shun 
They wing'd their flight aloft; then, stooping low, 
Perch'd on the double tree that bears the golden bough. 
Thro' the green leafs the glitt'ring shadows glow; 
As, on the sacred oak, the wintry mistletoe, 
Where the proud mother views her precious brood, 
And happier branches, which she never sow'd. 
Such was the glitt'ring; such the ruddy rind, 
And dancing leaves, that wanton'd in the wind. 
He seiz'd the shining bough with griping hold, 
And rent away, with ease, the ling'ring gold; 
Then to the Sibyl's palace bore the prize. 
Meantime the Trojan troops, with weeping eyes, 
To dead Misenus pay his obsequies. 
First, from the ground a lofty pile they rear, 
Of pitch trees, oaks, and pines, and unctuous fir: 
The fabric's front with cypress twigs they strew, 
And stick the sides with boughs of baleful yew. 
The topmost part his glitt'ring arms adorn; 
Warm waters, then, in brazen caldrons borne, 
Are pour'd to wash his body, joint by joint, 
And fragrant oils the stiffen'd limbs anoint. 
With groans and cries Misenus they deplore: 
Then on a bier, with purple cover'd o'er, 
The breathless body, thus bewail'd, they lay, 
And fire the pile, their faces turn'd away- 
Such reverend rites their fathers us'd to pay. 
Pure oil and incense on the fire they throw, 
And fat of victims, which his friends bestow. 
These gifts the greedy flames to dust devour; 
Then on the living coals red wine they pour; 
And, last, the relics by themselves dispose, 
Which in a brazen urn the priests inclose. 
Old Corynaeus compass'd thrice the crew, 
And dipp'd an olive branch in holy dew; 
Which thrice he sprinkled round, and thrice aloud 
Invok'd the dead, and then dismissed the crowd. 
But good Aeneas order'd on the shore 
A stately tomb, whose top a trumpet bore, 
A soldier's fauchion, and a seaman's oar. 
Thus was his friend interr'd; and deathless fame 
Still to the lofty cape consigns his name. 
These rites perform'd, the prince, without delay, 
Hastes to the nether world his destin'd way. 
Deep was the cave; and, downward as it went 
From the wide mouth, a rocky rough descent; 
And here th' access a gloomy grove defends, 
And there th' unnavigable lake extends, 
O'er whose unhappy waters, void of light, 
No bird presumes to steer his airy flight; 
Such deadly stenches from the depths arise, 
And steaming sulphur, that infects the skies. 
From hence the Grecian bards their legends make, 
And give the name Avernus to the lake. 
Four sable bullocks, in the yoke untaught, 
For sacrifice the pious hero brought. 
The priestess pours the wine betwixt their horns; 
Then cuts the curling hair; that first oblation burns, 
Invoking Hecate hither to repair: 
A pow'rful name in hell and upper air. 
The sacred priests with ready knives bereave 
The beasts of life, and in full bowls receive 
The streaming blood: a lamb to Hell and Night 
(The sable wool without a streak of white) 
Aeneas offers; and, by fate's decree, 
A barren heifer, Proserpine, to thee, 
With holocausts he Pluto's altar fills; 
Sev'n brawny bulls with his own hand he kills; 
Then on the broiling entrails oil he pours; 
Which, ointed thus, the raging flame devours. 
Late the nocturnal sacrifice begun, 
Nor ended till the next returning sun. 
Then earth began to bellow, trees to dance, 
And howling dogs in glimm'ring light advance, 
Ere Hecate came. "Far hence be souls profane!" 
The Sibyl cried, "and from the grove abstain! 
Now, Trojan, take the way thy fates afford; 
Assume thy courage, and unsheathe thy sword." 
She said, and pass'd along the gloomy space; 
The prince pursued her steps with equal pace. 
Ye realms, yet unreveal'd to human sight, 
Ye gods who rule the regions of the night, 
Ye gliding ghosts, permit me to relate 
The mystic wonders of your silent state! 
Obscure they went thro' dreary shades, that led 
Along the waste dominions of the dead. 
Thus wander travelers in woods by night, 
By the moon's doubtful and malignant light, 
When Jove in dusky clouds involves the skies, 
And the faint crescent shoots by fits before their eyes.

Just in the gate and in the jaws of hell, 
Revengeful Cares and sullen Sorrows dwell, 
And pale Diseases, and repining Age, 
Want, Fear, and Famine's unresisted rage; 
Here Toils, and Death, and Death's half-brother, Sleep, 
Forms terrible to view, their sentry keep; 
With anxious Pleasures of a guilty mind, 
Deep Frauds before, and open Force behind; 
The Furies' iron beds; and Strife, that shakes 
Her hissing tresses and unfolds her snakes. 
Full in the midst of this infernal road, 
An elm displays her dusky arms abroad: 
The God of Sleep there hides his heavy head, 
And empty dreams on ev'ry leaf are spread. 
Of various forms unnumber'd specters more, 
Centaurs, and double shapes, besiege the door. 
Before the passage, horrid Hydra stands, 
And Briareus with all his hundred hands; 
Gorgons, Geryon with his triple frame; 
And vain Chimaera vomits empty flame. 
The chief unsheath'd his shining steel, prepar'd, 
Tho' seiz'd with sudden fear, to force the guard, 
Off'ring his brandish'd weapon at their face; 
Had not the Sibyl stopp'd his eager pace, 
And told him what those empty phantoms were: 
Forms without bodies, and impassive air. 
Hence to deep Acheron they take their way, 
Whose troubled eddies, thick with ooze and clay, 
Are whirl'd aloft, and in Cocytus lost. 
There Charon stands, who rules the dreary coast- 
A sordid god: down from his hoary chin 
A length of beard descends, uncomb'd, unclean; 
His eyes, like hollow furnaces on fire; 
A girdle, foul with grease, binds his obscene attire. 
He spreads his canvas; with his pole he steers; 
The freights of flitting ghosts in his thin bottom bears.

He look'd in years; yet in his years were seen 
A youthful vigor and autumnal green. 
An airy crowd came rushing where he stood, 
Which fill'd the margin of the fatal flood: 
Husbands and wives, boys and unmarried maids, 
And mighty heroes' more majestic shades, 
And youths, intomb'd before their fathers' eyes, 
With hollow groans, and shrieks, and feeble cries. 
Thick as the leaves in autumn strow the woods, 
Or fowls, by winter forc'd, forsake the floods, 
And wing their hasty flight to happier lands; 
Such, and so thick, the shiv'ring army stands, 
And press for passage with extended hands. 
Now these, now those, the surly boatman bore: 
The rest he drove to distance from the shore. 
The hero, who beheld with wond'ring eyes 
The tumult mix'd with shrieks, laments, and cries, 
Ask'd of his guide, what the rude concourse meant; 
Why to the shore the thronging people bent; 
What forms of law among the ghosts were us'd; 
Why some were ferried o'er, and some refus'd. 
"Son of Anchises, offspring of the gods," 
The Sibyl said, "you see the Stygian floods, 
The sacred stream which heav'n's imperial state 
Attests in oaths, and fears to violate. 
The ghosts rejected are th' unhappy crew 
Depriv'd of sepulchers and fun'ral due: 
The boatman, Charon; those, the buried host, 
He ferries over to the farther coast; 
Nor dares his transport vessel cross the waves 
With such whose bones are not compos'd in graves. 
A hundred years they wander on the shore; 
At length, their penance done, are wafted o'er." 
The Trojan chief his forward pace repress'd, 
Revolving anxious thoughts within his breast, 
He saw his friends, who, whelm'd beneath the waves, 
Their fun'ral honors claim'd, and ask'd their quiet graves.

The lost Leucaspis in the crowd he knew, 
And the brave leader of the Lycian crew, 
Whom, on the Tyrrhene seas, the tempests met; 
The sailors master'd, and the ship o'erset. 
Amidst the spirits, Palinurus press'd, 
Yet fresh from life, a new-admitted guest, 
Who, while he steering view'd the stars, and bore 
His course from Afric to the Latian shore, 
Fell headlong down. The Trojan fix'd his view, 
And scarcely thro' the gloom the sullen shadow knew. 
Then thus the prince: "What envious pow'r, O friend, 
Brought your lov'd life to this disastrous end? 
For Phoebus, ever true in all he said, 
Has in your fate alone my faith betray'd. 
The god foretold you should not die, before 
You reach'd, secure from seas, th' Italian shore. 
Is this th' unerring pow'r?" The ghost replied; 
"Nor Phoebus flatter'd, nor his answers lied; 
Nor envious gods have sent me to the deep: 
But, while the stars and course of heav'n I keep, 
My wearied eyes were seiz'd with fatal sleep. 
I fell; and, with my weight, the helm constrain'd 
Was drawn along, which yet my gripe retain'd. 
Now by the winds and raging waves I swear, 
Your safety, more than mine, was then my care; 
Lest, of the guide bereft, the rudder lost, 
Your ship should run against the rocky coast. 
Three blust'ring nights, borne by the southern blast, 
I floated, and discover'd land at last: 
High on a mounting wave my head I bore, 
Forcing my strength, and gath'ring to the shore. 
Panting, but past the danger, now I seiz'd 
The craggy cliffs, and my tir'd members eas'd. 
While, cumber'd with my dropping clothes, I lay, 
The cruel nation, covetous of prey, 
Stain'd with my blood th' unhospitable coast; 
And now, by winds and waves, my lifeless limbs are toss'd:

Which O avert, by yon ethereal light, 
Which I have lost for this eternal night! 
Or, if by dearer ties you may be won, 
By your dead sire, and by your living son, 
Redeem from this reproach my wand'ring ghost; 
Or with your navy seek the Velin coast, 
And in a peaceful grave my corpse compose; 
Or, if a nearer way your mother shows, 
Without whose aid you durst not undertake 
This frightful passage o'er the Stygian lake, 
Lend to this wretch your hand, and waft him o'er 
To the sweet banks of yon forbidden shore." 
Scarce had he said, the prophetess began: 
"What hopes delude thee, miserable man? 
Think'st thou, thus unintomb'd, to cross the floods, 
To view the Furies and infernal gods, 
And visit, without leave, the dark abodes? 
Attend the term of long revolving years; 
Fate, and the dooming gods, are deaf to tears. 
This comfort of thy dire misfortune take: 
The wrath of Heav'n, inflicted for thy sake, 
With vengeance shall pursue th' inhuman coast, 
Till they propitiate thy offended ghost, 
And raise a tomb, with vows and solemn pray'r; 
And Palinurus' name the place shall bear." 
This calm'd his cares; sooth'd with his future fame, 
And pleas'd to hear his propagated name. 
Now nearer to the Stygian lake they draw: 
Whom, from the shore, the surly boatman saw; 
Observ'd their passage thro' the shady wood, 
And mark'd their near approaches to the flood. 
Then thus he call'd aloud, inflam'd with wrath: 
"Mortal, whate'er, who this forbidden path 
In arms presum'st to tread, I charge thee, stand, 
And tell thy name, and bus'ness in the land. 
Know this, the realm of night- the Stygian shore: 
My boat conveys no living bodies o'er; 
Nor was I pleas'd great Theseus once to bear, 
Who forc'd a passage with his pointed spear, 
Nor strong Alcides- men of mighty fame, 
And from th' immortal gods their lineage came. 
In fetters one the barking porter tied, 
And took him trembling from his sov'reign's side: 
Two sought by force to seize his beauteous bride." 
To whom the Sibyl thus: "Compose thy mind; 
Nor frauds are here contriv'd, nor force design'd. 
Still may the dog the wand'ring troops constrain 
Of airy ghosts, and vex the guilty train, 
And with her grisly lord his lovely queen remain. 
The Trojan chief, whose lineage is from Jove, 
Much fam'd for arms, and more for filial love, 
Is sent to seek his sire in your Elysian grove. 
If neither piety, nor Heav'n's command, 
Can gain his passage to the Stygian strand, 
This fatal present shall prevail at least." 
Then shew'd the shining bough, conceal'd within her vest.

No more was needful: for the gloomy god 
Stood mute with awe, to see the golden rod; 
Admir'd the destin'd off'ring to his queen- 
A venerable gift, so rarely seen. 
His fury thus appeas'd, he puts to land; 
The ghosts forsake their seats at his command: 
He clears the deck, receives the mighty freight; 
The leaky vessel groans beneath the weight. 
Slowly she sails, and scarcely stems the tides; 
The pressing water pours within her sides. 
His passengers at length are wafted o'er, 
Expos'd, in muddy weeds, upon the miry shore. 
No sooner landed, in his den they found 
The triple porter of the Stygian sound, 
Grim Cerberus, who soon began to rear 
His crested snakes, and arm'd his bristling hair. 
The prudent Sibyl had before prepar'd 
A sop, in honey steep'd, to charm the guard; 
Which, mix'd with pow'rful drugs, she cast before 
His greedy grinning jaws, just op'd to roar. 
With three enormous mouths he gapes; and straight, 
With hunger press'd, devours the pleasing bait. 
Long draughts of sleep his monstrous limbs enslave; 
He reels, and, falling, fills the spacious cave. 
The keeper charm'd, the chief without delay 
Pass'd on, and took th' irremeable way. 
Before the gates, the cries of babes new born, 
Whom fate had from their tender mothers torn, 
Assault his ears: then those, whom form of laws 
Condemn'd to die, when traitors judg'd their cause. 
Nor want they lots, nor judges to review 
The wrongful sentence, and award a new. 
Minos, the strict inquisitor, appears; 
And lives and crimes, with his assessors, hears. 
Round in his urn the blended balls he rolls, 
Absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls. 
The next, in place and punishment, are they 
Who prodigally throw their souls away; 
Fools, who, repining at their wretched state, 
And loathing anxious life, suborn'd their fate. 
With late repentance now they would retrieve 
The bodies they forsook, and wish to live; 
Their pains and poverty desire to bear, 
To view the light of heav'n, and breathe the vital air: 
But fate forbids; the Stygian floods oppose, 
And with circling streams the captive souls inclose. 
Not far from thence, the Mournful Fields appear 
So call'd from lovers that inhabit there. 
The souls whom that unhappy flame invades, 
In secret solitude and myrtle shades 
Make endless moans, and, pining with desire, 
Lament too late their unextinguish'd fire. 
Here Procris, Eriphyle here he found, 
Baring her breast, yet bleeding with the wound 
Made by her son. He saw Pasiphae there, 
With Phaedra's ghost, a foul incestuous pair. 
There Laodamia, with Evadne, moves, 
Unhappy both, but loyal in their loves: 
Caeneus, a woman once, and once a man, 
But ending in the sex she first began. 
Not far from these Phoenician Dido stood, 
Fresh from her wound, her bosom bath'd in blood; 
Whom when the Trojan hero hardly knew, 
Obscure in shades, and with a doubtful view, 
(Doubtful as he who sees, thro' dusky night, 
Or thinks he sees, the moon's uncertain light,) 
With tears he first approach'd the sullen shade; 
And, as his love inspir'd him, thus he said: 
"Unhappy queen! then is the common breath 
Of rumor true, in your reported death, 
And I, alas! the cause? By Heav'n, I vow, 
And all the pow'rs that rule the realms below, 
Unwilling I forsook your friendly state, 
Commanded by the gods, and forc'd by fate- 
Those gods, that fate, whose unresisted might 
Have sent me to these regions void of light, 
Thro' the vast empire of eternal night. 
Nor dar'd I to presume, that, press'd with grief, 
My flight should urge you to this dire relief. 
Stay, stay your steps, and listen to my vows: 
'T is the last interview that fate allows!" 
In vain he thus attempts her mind to move 
With tears, and pray'rs, and late-repenting love. 
Disdainfully she look'd; then turning round, 
But fix'd her eyes unmov'd upon the ground, 
And what he says and swears, regards no more 
Than the deaf rocks, when the loud billows roar; 
But whirl'd away, to shun his hateful sight, 
Hid in the forest and the shades of night; 
Then sought Sichaeus thro' the shady grove, 
Who answer'd all her cares, and equal'd all her love. 
Some pious tears the pitying hero paid, 
And follow'd with his eyes the flitting shade, 
Then took the forward way, by fate ordain'd, 
And, with his guide, the farther fields attain'd, 
Where, sever'd from the rest, the warrior souls remain'd.

Tydeus he met, with Meleager's race, 
The pride of armies, and the soldiers' grace; 
And pale Adrastus with his ghastly face. 
Of Trojan chiefs he view'd a num'rous train, 
All much lamented, all in battle slain; 
Glaucus and Medon, high above the rest, 
Antenor's sons, and Ceres' sacred priest. 
And proud Idaeus, Priam's charioteer, 
Who shakes his empty reins, and aims his airy spear. 
The gladsome ghosts, in circling troops, attend 
And with unwearied eyes behold their friend; 
Delight to hover near, and long to know 
What bus'ness brought him to the realms below. 
But Argive chiefs, and Agamemnon's train, 
When his refulgent arms flash'd thro' the shady plain, 
Fled from his well-known face, with wonted fear, 
As when his thund'ring sword and pointed spear 
Drove headlong to their ships, and glean'd the routed rear.

They rais'd a feeble cry, with trembling notes; 
But the weak voice deceiv'd their gasping throats. 
Here Priam's son, Deiphobus, he found, 
Whose face and limbs were one continued wound: 
Dishonest, with lopp'd arms, the youth appears, 
Spoil'd of his nose, and shorten'd of his ears. 
He scarcely knew him, striving to disown 
His blotted form, and blushing to be known; 
And therefore first began: "O Tsucer's race, 
Who durst thy faultless figure thus deface? 
What heart could wish, what hand inflict, this dire disgrace?

'Twas fam'd, that in our last and fatal night 
Your single prowess long sustain'd the fight, 
Till tir'd, not forc'd, a glorious fate you chose, 
And fell upon a heap of slaughter'd foes. 
But, in remembrance of so brave a deed, 
A tomb and fun'ral honors I decreed; 
Thrice call'd your manes on the Trojan plains: 
The place your armor and your name retains. 
Your body too I sought, and, had I found, 
Design'd for burial in your native ground." 
The ghost replied: "Your piety has paid 
All needful rites, to rest my wand'ring shade; 
But cruel fate, and my more cruel wife, 
To Grecian swords betray'd my sleeping life. 
These are the monuments of Helen's love: 
The shame I bear below, the marks I bore above. 
You know in what deluding joys we pass'd 
The night that was by Heav'n decreed our last: 
For, when the fatal horse, descending down, 
Pregnant with arms, o'erwhelm'd th' unhappy town 
She feign'd nocturnal orgies; left my bed, 
And, mix'd with Trojan dames, the dances led 
Then, waving high her torch, the signal made, 
Which rous'd the Grecians from their ambuscade. 
With watching overworn, with cares oppress'd, 
Unhappy I had laid me down to rest, 
And heavy sleep my weary limbs possess'd. 
Meantime my worthy wife our arms mislaid, 
And from beneath my head my sword convey'd; 
The door unlatch'd, and, with repeated calls, 
Invites her former lord within my walls. 
Thus in her crime her confidence she plac'd, 
And with new treasons would redeem the past. 
What need I more? Into the room they ran, 
And meanly murther'd a defenseless man. 
Ulysses, basely born, first led the way. 
Avenging pow'rs! with justice if I pray, 
That fortune be their own another day! 
But answer you; and in your turn relate, 
What brought you, living, to the Stygian state: 
Driv'n by the winds and errors of the sea, 
Or did you Heav'n's superior doom obey? 
Or tell what other chance conducts your way, 
To view with mortal eyes our dark retreats, 
Tumults and torments of th' infernal seats." 
While thus in talk the flying hours they pass, 
The sun had finish'd more than half his race: 
And they, perhaps, in words and tears had spent 
The little time of stay which Heav'n had lent; 
But thus the Sibyl chides their long delay: 
"Night rushes down, and headlong drives the day: 
'T is here, in different paths, the way divides; 
The right to Pluto's golden palace guides; 
The left to that unhappy region tends, 
Which to the depth of Tartarus descends; 
The seat of night profound, and punish'd fiends." 
Then thus Deiphobus: "O sacred maid, 
Forbear to chide, and be your will obey'd! 
Lo! to the secret shadows I retire, 
To pay my penance till my years expire. 
Proceed, auspicious prince, with glory crown'd, 
And born to better fates than I have found." 
He said; and, while he said, his steps he turn'd 
To secret shadows, and in silence mourn'd. 
The hero, looking on the left, espied 
A lofty tow'r, and strong on ev'ry side 
With treble walls, which Phlegethon surrounds, 
Whose fiery flood the burning empire bounds; 
And, press'd betwixt the rocks, the bellowing noise resounds

Wide is the fronting gate, and, rais'd on high 
With adamantine columns, threats the sky. 
Vain is the force of man, and Heav'n's as vain, 
To crush the pillars which the pile sustain. 
Sublime on these a tow'r of steel is rear'd; 
And dire Tisiphone there keeps the ward, 
Girt in her sanguine gown, by night and day, 
Observant of the souls that pass the downward way. 
From hence are heard the groans of ghosts, the pains 
Of sounding lashes and of dragging chains. 
The Trojan stood astonish'd at their cries, 
And ask'd his guide from whence those yells arise; 
And what the crimes, and what the tortures were, 
And loud laments that rent the liquid air. 
She thus replied: "The chaste and holy race 
Are all forbidden this polluted place. 
But Hecate, when she gave to rule the woods, 
Then led me trembling thro' these dire abodes, 
And taught the tortures of th' avenging gods. 
These are the realms of unrelenting fate; 
And awful Rhadamanthus rules the state. 
He hears and judges each committed crime; 
Enquires into the manner, place, and time. 
The conscious wretch must all his acts reveal, 
(Loth to confess, unable to conceal), 
From the first moment of his vital breath, 
To his last hour of unrepenting death. 
Straight, o'er the guilty ghost, the Fury shakes 
The sounding whip and brandishes her snakes, 
And the pale sinner, with her sisters, takes. 
Then, of itself, unfolds th' eternal door; 
With dreadful sounds the brazen hinges roar. 
You see, before the gate, what stalking ghost 
Commands the guard, what sentries keep the post. 
More formidable Hydra stands within, 
Whose jaws with iron teeth severely grin. 
The gaping gulf low to the center lies, 
And twice as deep as earth is distant from the skies. 
The rivals of the gods, the Titan race, 
Here, sing'd with lightning, roll within th' unfathom'd space.

Here lie th' Alaean twins, (I saw them both,) 
Enormous bodies, of gigantic growth, 
Who dar'd in fight the Thund'rer to defy, 
Affect his heav'n, and force him from the sky. 
Salmoneus, suff'ring cruel pains, I found, 
For emulating Jove; the rattling sound 
Of mimic thunder, and the glitt'ring blaze 
Of pointed lightnings, and their forky rays. 
Thro' Elis and the Grecian towns he flew; 
Th' audacious wretch four fiery coursers drew: 
He wav'd a torch aloft, and, madly vain, 
Sought godlike worship from a servile train. 
Ambitious fool! with horny hoofs to pass 
O'er hollow arches of resounding brass, 
To rival thunder in its rapid course, 
And imitate inimitable force! 
But he, the King of Heav'n, obscure on high, 
Bar'd his red arm, and, launching from the sky 
His writhen bolt, not shaking empty smoke, 
Down to the deep abyss the flaming felon strook. 
There Tityus was to see, who took his birth 
From heav'n, his nursing from the foodful earth. 
Here his gigantic limbs, with large embrace, 
Infold nine acres of infernal space. 
A rav'nous vulture, in his open'd side, 
Her crooked beak and cruel talons tried; 
Still for the growing liver digg'd his breast; 
The growing liver still supplied the feast; 
Still are his entrails fruitful to their pains: 
Th' immortal hunger lasts, th' immortal food remains. 
Ixion and Perithous I could name, 
And more Thessalian chiefs of mighty fame. 
High o'er their heads a mold'ring rock is plac'd, 
That promises a fall, and shakes at ev'ry blast. 
They lie below, on golden beds display'd; 
And genial feasts with regal pomp are made. 
The Queen of Furies by their sides is set, 
And snatches from their mouths th' untasted meat, 
Which if they touch, her hissing snakes she rears, 
Tossing her torch, and thund'ring in their ears. 
Then they, who brothers' better claim disown, 
Expel their parents, and usurp the throne; 
Defraud their clients, and, to lucre sold, 
Sit brooding on unprofitable gold; 
Who dare not give, and ev'n refuse to lend 
To their poor kindred, or a wanting friend. 
Vast is the throng of these; nor less the train 
Of lustful youths, for foul adult'ry slain: 
Hosts of deserters, who their honor sold, 
And basely broke their faith for bribes of gold. 
All these within the dungeon's depth remain, 
Despairing pardon, and expecting pain. 
Ask not what pains; nor farther seek to know 
Their process, or the forms of law below. 
Some roll a weighty stone; some, laid along, 
And bound with burning wires, on spokes of wheels are hung

Unhappy Theseus, doom'd for ever there, 
Is fix'd by fate on his eternal chair; 
And wretched Phlegyas warns the world with cries 
(Could warning make the world more just or wise): 
'Learn righteousness, and dread th' avenging deities.' 
To tyrants others have their country sold, 
Imposing foreign lords, for foreign gold; 
Some have old laws repeal'd, new statutes made, 
Not as the people pleas'd, but as they paid; 
With incest some their daughters' bed profan'd: 
All dar'd the worst of ills, and, what they dar'd, attain'd.

Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues, 
And throats of brass, inspir'd with iron lungs, 
I could not half those horrid crimes repeat, 
Nor half the punishments those crimes have met. 
But let us haste our voyage to pursue: 
The walls of Pluto's palace are in view; 
The gate, and iron arch above it, stands 
On anvils labor'd by the Cyclops' hands. 
Before our farther way the Fates allow, 
Here must we fix on high the golden bough." 
She said: and thro' the gloomy shades they pass'd, 
And chose the middle path. Arriv'd at last, 
The prince with living water sprinkled o'er 
His limbs and body; then approach'd the door, 
Possess'd the porch, and on the front above 
He fix'd the fatal bough requir'd by Pluto's love. 
These holy rites perform'd, they took their way 
Where long extended plains of pleasure lay: 
The verdant fields with those of heav'n may vie, 
With ether vested, and a purple sky; 
The blissful seats of happy souls below. 
Stars of their own, and their own suns, they know; 
Their airy limbs in sports they exercise, 
And on the green contend the wrestler's prize. 
Some in heroic verse divinely sing; 
Others in artful measures led the ring. 
The Thracian bard, surrounded by the rest, 
There stands conspicuous in his flowing vest; 
His flying fingers, and harmonious quill, 
Strikes sev'n distinguish'd notes, and sev'n at once they fill.

Here found they Tsucer's old heroic race, 
Born better times and happier years to grace. 
Assaracus and Ilus here enjoy 
Perpetual fame, with him who founded Troy. 
The chief beheld their chariots from afar, 
Their shining arms, and coursers train'd to war: 
Their lances fix'd in earth, their steeds around, 
Free from their harness, graze the flow'ry ground. 
The love of horses which they had, alive, 
And care of chariots, after death survive. 
Some cheerful souls were feasting on the plain; 
Some did the song, and some the choir maintain, 
Beneath a laurel shade, where mighty Po 
Mounts up to woods above, and hides his head below. 
Here patriots live, who, for their country's good, 
In fighting fields, were prodigal of blood: 
Priests of unblemish'd lives here make abode, 
And poets worthy their inspiring god; 
And searching wits, of more mechanic parts, 
Who grac'd their age with new-invented arts: 
Those who to worth their bounty did extend, 
And those who knew that bounty to commend. 
The heads of these with holy fillets bound, 
And all their temples were with garlands crown'd. 
To these the Sibyl thus her speech address'd, 
And first to him surrounded by the rest 
(Tow'ring his height, and ample was his breast): 
"Say, happy souls, divine Musaeus, say, 
Where lives Anchises, and where lies our way 
To find the hero, for whose only sake 
We sought the dark abodes, and cross'd the bitter lake?"

To this the sacred poet thus replied: 
"In no fix'd place the happy souls reside. 
In groves we live, and lie on mossy beds, 
By crystal streams, that murmur thro' the meads: 
But pass yon easy hill, and thence descend; 
The path conducts you to your journey's end." 
This said, he led them up the mountain's brow, 
And shews them all the shining fields below. 
They wind the hill, and thro' the blissful meadows go. 
But old Anchises, in a flow'ry vale, 
Review'd his muster'd race, and took the tale: 
Those happy spirits, which, ordain'd by fate, 
For future beings and new bodies wait- 
With studious thought observ'd th' illustrious throng, 
In nature's order as they pass'd along: 
Their names, their fates, their conduct, and their care,

In peaceful senates and successful war. 
He, when Aeneas on the plain appears, 
Meets him with open arms, and falling tears. 
"Welcome," he said, "the gods' undoubted race! 
O long expected to my dear embrace! 
Once more 't is giv'n me to behold your face! 
The love and pious duty which you pay 
Have pass'd the perils of so hard a way. 
'T is true, computing times, I now believ'd 
The happy day approach'd; nor are my hopes deceiv'd. 
What length of lands, what oceans have you pass'd; 
What storms sustain'd, and on what shores been cast? 
How have I fear'd your fate! but fear'd it most, 
When love assail'd you, on the Libyan coast." 
To this, the filial duty thus replies: 
"Your sacred ghost before my sleeping eyes 
Appear'd, and often urg'd this painful enterprise. 
After long tossing on the Tyrrhene sea, 
My navy rides at anchor in the bay. 
But reach your hand, O parent shade, nor shun 
The dear embraces of your longing son!" 
He said; and falling tears his face bedew: 
Then thrice around his neck his arms he threw; 
And thrice the flitting shadow slipp'd away, 
Like winds, or empty dreams that fly the day. 
Now, in a secret vale, the Trojan sees 
A sep'rate grove, thro' which a gentle breeze 
Plays with a passing breath, and whispers thro' the trees;

And, just before the confines of the wood, 
The gliding Lethe leads her silent flood. 
About the boughs an airy nation flew, 
Thick as the humming bees, that hunt the golden dew; 
In summer's heat on tops of lilies feed, 
And creep within their bells, to suck the balmy seed: 
The winged army roams the fields around; 
The rivers and the rocks remurmur to the sound. 
Aeneas wond'ring stood, then ask'd the cause 
Which to the stream the crowding people draws. 
Then thus the sire: "The souls that throng the flood 
Are those to whom, by fate, are other bodies ow'd: 
In Lethe's lake they long oblivion taste, 
Of future life secure, forgetful of the past. 
Long has my soul desir'd this time and place, 
To set before your sight your glorious race, 
That this presaging joy may fire your mind 
To seek the shores by destiny design'd."- 
"O father, can it be, that souls sublime 
Return to visit our terrestrial clime, 
And that the gen'rous mind, releas'd by death, 
Can covet lazy limbs and mortal breath?" 
Anchises then, in order, thus begun 
To clear those wonders to his godlike son: 
"Know, first, that heav'n, and earth's compacted frame, 
And flowing waters, and the starry flame, 
And both the radiant lights, one common soul 
Inspires and feeds, and animates the whole. 
This active mind, infus'd thro' all the space, 
Unites and mingles with the mighty mass. 
Hence men and beasts the breath of life obtain, 
And birds of air, and monsters of the main. 
Th' ethereal vigor is in all the same, 
And every soul is fill'd with equal flame; 
As much as earthy limbs, and gross allay 
Of mortal members, subject to decay, 
Blunt not the beams of heav'n and edge of day. 
From this coarse mixture of terrestrial parts, 
Desire and fear by turns possess their hearts, 
And grief, and joy; nor can the groveling mind, 
In the dark dungeon of the limbs confin'd, 
Assert the native skies, or own its heav'nly kind: 
Nor death itself can wholly wash their stains; 
But long-contracted filth ev'n in the soul remains. 
The relics of inveterate vice they wear, 
And spots of sin obscene in ev'ry face appear. 
For this are various penances enjoin'd; 
And some are hung to bleach upon the wind, 
Some plung'd in waters, others purg'd in fires, 
Till all the dregs are drain'd, and all the rust expires.

All have their manes, and those manes bear: 
The few, so cleans'd, to these abodes repair, 
And breathe, in ample fields, the soft Elysian air. 
Then are they happy, when by length of time 
The scurf is worn away of each committed crime; 
No speck is left of their habitual stains, 
But the pure ether of the soul remains. 
But, when a thousand rolling years are past, 
(So long their punishments and penance last,) 
Whole droves of minds are, by the driving god, 
Compell'd to drink the deep Lethaean flood, 
In large forgetful draughts to steep the cares 
Of their past labors, and their irksome years, 
That, unrememb'ring of its former pain, 
The soul may suffer mortal flesh again." 
Thus having said, the father spirit leads 
The priestess and his son thro' swarms of shades, 
And takes a rising ground, from thence to see 
The long procession of his progeny. 
"Survey," pursued the sire, "this airy throng, 
As, offer'd to thy view, they pass along. 
These are th' Italian names, which fate will join 
With ours, and graff upon the Trojan line. 
Observe the youth who first appears in sight, 
And holds the nearest station to the light, 
Already seems to snuff the vital air, 
And leans just forward, on a shining spear: 
Silvius is he, thy last-begotten race, 
But first in order sent, to fill thy place; 
An Alban name, but mix'd with Dardan blood, 
Born in the covert of a shady wood: 
Him fair Lavinia, thy surviving wife, 
Shall breed in groves, to lead a solitary life. 
In Alba he shall fix his royal seat, 
And, born a king, a race of kings beget. 
Then Procas, honor of the Trojan name, 
Capys, and Numitor, of endless fame. 
A second Silvius after these appears; 
Silvius Aeneas, for thy name he bears; 
For arms and justice equally renown'd, 
Who, late restor'd, in Alba shall be crown'd. 
How great they look! how vig'rously they wield 
Their weighty lances, and sustain the shield! 
But they, who crown'd with oaken wreaths appear, 
Shall Gabian walls and strong Fidena rear; 
Nomentum, Bola, with Pometia, found; 
And raise Collatian tow'rs on rocky ground. 
All these shall then be towns of mighty fame, 
Tho' now they lie obscure, and lands without a name. 
See Romulus the great, born to restore 
The crown that once his injur'd grandsire wore. 
This prince a priestess of your blood shall bear, 
And like his sire in arms he shall appear. 
Two rising crests, his royal head adorn; 
Born from a god, himself to godhead born: 
His sire already signs him for the skies, 
And marks the seat amidst the deities. 
Auspicious chief! thy race, in times to come, 
Shall spread the conquests of imperial Rome- 
Rome, whose ascending tow'rs shall heav'n invade, 
Involving earth and ocean in her shade; 
High as the Mother of the Gods in place, 
And proud, like her, of an immortal race. 
Then, when in pomp she makes the Phrygian round, 
With golden turrets on her temples crown'd; 
A hundred gods her sweeping train supply; 
Her offspring all, and all command the sky. 
"Now fix your sight, and stand intent, to see 
Your Roman race, and Julian progeny. 
The mighty Caesar waits his vital hour, 
Impatient for the world, and grasps his promis'd pow'r. 
But next behold the youth of form divine, 
Ceasar himself, exalted in his line; 
Augustus, promis'd oft, and long foretold, 
Sent to the realm that Saturn rul'd of old; 
Born to restore a better age of gold. 
Afric and India shall his pow'r obey; 
He shall extend his propagated sway 
Beyond the solar year, without the starry way, 
Where Atlas turns the rolling heav'ns around, 
And his broad shoulders with their lights are crown'd. 
At his foreseen approach, already quake 
The Caspian kingdoms and Maeotian lake: 
Their seers behold the tempest from afar, 
And threat'ning oracles denounce the war. 
Nile hears him knocking at his sev'nfold gates, 
And seeks his hidden spring, and fears his nephew's fates.

Nor Hercules more lands or labors knew, 
Not tho' the brazen-footed hind he slew, 
Freed Erymanthus from the foaming boar, 
And dipp'd his arrows in Lernaean gore; 
Nor Bacchus, turning from his Indian war, 
By tigers drawn triumphant in his car, 
From Nisus' top descending on the plains, 
With curling vines around his purple reins. 
And doubt we yet thro' dangers to pursue 
The paths of honor, and a crown in view? 
But what's the man, who from afar appears? 
His head with olive crown'd, his hand a censer bears, 
His hoary beard and holy vestments bring 
His lost idea back: I know the Roman king. 
He shall to peaceful Rome new laws ordain, 
Call'd from his mean abode a scepter to sustain. 
Him Tullus next in dignity succeeds, 
An active prince, and prone to martial deeds. 
He shall his troops for fighting fields prepare, 
Disus'd to toils, and triumphs of the war. 
By dint of sword his crown he shall increase, 
And scour his armor from the rust of peace. 
Whom Ancus follows, with a fawning air, 
But vain within, and proudly popular. 
Next view the Tarquin kings, th' avenging sword 
Of Brutus, justly drawn, and Rome restor'd. 
He first renews the rods and ax severe, 
And gives the consuls royal robes to wear. 
His sons, who seek the tyrant to sustain, 
And long for arbitrary lords again, 
With ignominy scourg'd, in open sight, 
He dooms to death deserv'd, asserting public right. 
Unhappy man, to break the pious laws 
Of nature, pleading in his children's cause! 
Howeer the doubtful fact is understood, 
'T is love of honor, and his country's good: 
The consul, not the father, sheds the blood. 
Behold Torquatus the same track pursue; 
And, next, the two devoted Decii view: 
The Drusian line, Camillus loaded home 
With standards well redeem'd, and foreign foes o'ercome 
The pair you see in equal armor shine, 
Now, friends below, in close embraces join; 
But, when they leave the shady realms of night, 
And, cloth'd in bodies, breathe your upper light, 
With mortal hate each other shall pursue: 
What wars, what wounds, what slaughter shall ensue! 
From Alpine heights the father first descends; 
His daughter's husband in the plain attends: 
His daughter's husband arms his eastern friends. 
Embrace again, my sons, be foes no more; 
Nor stain your country with her children's gore! 
And thou, the first, lay down thy lawless claim, 
Thou, of my blood, who bearist the Julian name! 
Another comes, who shall in triumph ride, 
And to the Capitol his chariot guide, 
From conquer'd Corinth, rich with Grecian spoils. 
And yet another, fam'd for warlike toils, 
On Argos shall impose the Roman laws, 
And on the Greeks revenge the Trojan cause; 
Shall drag in chains their Achillean race; 
Shall vindicate his ancestors' disgrace, 
And Pallas, for her violated place. 
Great Cato there, for gravity renown'd, 
And conqu'ring Cossus goes with laurels crown'd. 
Who can omit the Gracchi? who declare 
The Scipios' worth, those thunderbolts of war, 
The double bane of Carthage? Who can see 
Without esteem for virtuous poverty, 
Severe Fabricius, or can cease t' admire 
The plowman consul in his coarse attire? 
Tir'd as I am, my praise the Fabii claim; 
And thou, great hero, greatest of thy name, 
Ordain'd in war to save the sinking state, 
And, by delays, to put a stop to fate! 
Let others better mold the running mass 
Of metals, and inform the breathing brass, 
And soften into flesh a marble face; 
Plead better at the bar; describe the skies, 
And when the stars descend, and when they rise. 
But, Rome, 't is thine alone, with awful sway, 
To rule mankind, and make the world obey, 
Disposing peace and war by thy own majestic way; 
To tame the proud, the fetter'd slave to free: 
These are imperial arts, and worthy thee." 
He paus'd; and, while with wond'ring eyes they view'd 
The passing spirits, thus his speech renew'd: 
"See great Marcellus! how, untir'd in toils, 
He moves with manly grace, how rich with regal spoils! 
He, when his country, threaten'd with alarms, 
Requires his courage and his conqu'ring arms, 
Shall more than once the Punic bands affright; 
Shall kill the Gaulish king in single fight; 
Then to the Capitol in triumph move, 
And the third spoils shall grace Feretrian Jove." 
Aeneas here beheld, of form divine, 
A godlike youth in glitt'ring armor shine, 
With great Marcellus keeping equal pace; 
But gloomy were his eyes, dejected was his face. 
He saw, and, wond'ring, ask'd his airy guide, 
What and of whence was he, who press'd the hero's side: 
"His son, or one of his illustrious name? 
How like the former, and almost the same! 
Observe the crowds that compass him around; 
All gaze, and all admire, and raise a shouting sound: 
But hov'ring mists around his brows are spread, 
And night, with sable shades, involves his head." 
"Seek not to know," the ghost replied with tears, 
"The sorrows of thy sons in future years. 
This youth (the blissful vision of a day) 
Shall just be shown on earth, and snatch'd away. 
The gods too high had rais'd the Roman state, 
Were but their gifts as permanent as great. 
What groans of men shall fill the Martian field! 
How fierce a blaze his flaming pile shall yield! 
What fun'ral pomp shall floating Tiber see, 
When, rising from his bed, he views the sad solemnity! 
No youth shall equal hopes of glory give, 
No youth afford so great a cause to grieve; 
The Trojan honor, and the Roman boast, 
Admir'd when living, and ador'd when lost! 
Mirror of ancient faith in early youth! 
Undaunted worth, inviolable truth! 
No foe, unpunish'd, in the fighting field 
Shall dare thee, foot to foot, with sword and shield; 
Much less in arms oppose thy matchless force, 
When thy sharp spurs shall urge thy foaming horse. 
Ah! couldst thou break thro' fate's severe decree, 
A new Marcellus shall arise in thee! 
Full canisters of fragrant lilies bring, 
Mix'd with the purple roses of the spring; 
Let me with fun'ral flow'rs his body strow; 
This gift which parents to their children owe, 
This unavailing gift, at least, I may bestow!" 
Thus having said, he led the hero round 
The confines of the blest Elysian ground; 
Which when Anchises to his son had shown, 
And fir'd his mind to mount the promis'd throne, 
He tells the future wars, ordain'd by fate; 
The strength and customs of the Latian state; 
The prince, and people; and forearms his care 
With rules, to push his fortune, or to bear. 
Two gates the silent house of Sleep adorn; 
Of polish'd ivory this, that of transparent horn: 
True visions thro' transparent horn arise; 
Thro' polish'd ivory pass deluding lies. 
Of various things discoursing as he pass'd, 
Anchises hither bends his steps at last. 
Then, thro' the gate of iv'ry, he dismiss'd 
His valiant offspring and divining guest. 
Straight to the ships Aeneas his way, 
Embark'd his men, and skimm'd along the sea, 
Still coasting, till he gain'd Cajeta's bay. 
At length on oozy ground his galleys moor; 
Their heads are turn'd to sea, their sterns to shore. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VII

And thou, O matron of immortal fame, 
Here dying, to the shore hast left thy name; 
Cajeta still the place is call'd from thee, 
The nurse of great Aeneas' infancy. 
Here rest thy bones in rich Hesperia's plains; 
Thy name ('t is all a ghost can have) remains. 
Now, when the prince her fun'ral rites had paid, 
He plow'd the Tyrrhene seas with sails display'd. 
From land a gentle breeze arose by night, 
Serenely shone the stars, the moon was bright, 
And the sea trembled with her silver light. 
Now near the shelves of Circe's shores they run, 
(Circe the rich, the daughter of the Sun,) 
A dang'rous coast: the goddess wastes her days 
In joyous songs; the rocks resound her lays: 
In spinning, or the loom, she spends the night, 
And cedar brands supply her father's light. 
From hence were heard, rebellowing to the main, 
The roars of lions that refuse the chain, 
The grunts of bristled boars, and groans of bears, 
And herds of howling wolves that stun the sailors' ears.

These from their caverns, at the close of night, 
Fill the sad isle with horror and affright. 
Darkling they mourn their fate, whom Circe's pow'r, 
(That watch'd the moon and planetary hour,) 
With words and wicked herbs from humankind 
Had alter'd, and in brutal shapes confin'd. 
Which monsters lest the Trojans' pious host 
Should bear, or touch upon th' inchanted coast, 
Propitious Neptune steer'd their course by night 
With rising gales that sped their happy flight. 
Supplied with these, they skim the sounding shore, 
And hear the swelling surges vainly roar. 
Now, when the rosy morn began to rise, 
And wav'd her saffron streamer thro' the skies; 
When Thetis blush'd in purple not her own, 
And from her face the breathing winds were blown, 
A sudden silence sate upon the sea, 
And sweeping oars, with struggling, urge their way. 
The Trojan, from the main, beheld a wood, 
Which thick with shades and a brown horror stood: 
Betwixt the trees the Tiber took his course, 
With whirlpools dimpled; and with downward force, 
That drove the sand along, he took his way, 
And roll'd his yellow billows to the sea. 
About him, and above, and round the wood, 
The birds that haunt the borders of his flood, 
That bath'd within, or basked upon his side, 
To tuneful songs their narrow throats applied. 
The captain gives command; the joyful train 
Glide thro' the gloomy shade, and leave the main. 
Now, Erato, thy poet's mind inspire, 
And fill his soul with thy celestial fire! 
Relate what Latium was; her ancient kings; 
Declare the past and state of things, 
When first the Trojan fleet Ausonia sought, 
And how the rivals lov'd, and how they fought. 
These are my theme, and how the war began, 
And how concluded by the godlike man: 
For I shall sing of battles, blood, and rage, 
Which princes and their people did engage; 
And haughty souls, that, mov'd with mutual hate, 
In fighting fields pursued and found their fate; 
That rous'd the Tyrrhene realm with loud alarms, 
And peaceful Italy involv'd in arms. 
A larger scene of action is display'd; 
And, rising hence, a greater work is weigh'd. 
Latinus, old and mild, had long possess'd 
The Latin scepter, and his people blest: 
His father Faunus; a Laurentian dame 
His mother; fair Marica was her name. 
But Faunus came from Picus: Picus drew 
His birth from Saturn, if records be true. 
Thus King Latinus, in the third degree, 
Had Saturn author of his family. 
But this old peaceful prince, as Heav'n decreed, 
Was blest with no male issue to succeed: 
His sons in blooming youth were snatch'd by fate; 
One only daughter heir'd the royal state. 
Fir'd with her love, and with ambition led, 
The neighb'ring princes court her nuptial bed. 
Among the crowd, but far above the rest, 
Young Turnus to the beauteous maid address'd. 
Turnus, for high descent and graceful mien, 
Was first, and favor'd by the Latian queen; 
With him she strove to join Lavinia's hand, 
But dire portents the purpos'd match withstand. 
Deep in the palace, of long growth, there stood 
A laurel's trunk, a venerable wood; 
Where rites divine were paid; whose holy hair 
Was kept and cut with superstitious care. 
This plant Latinus, when his town he wall'd, 
Then found, and from the tree Laurentum call'd; 
And last, in honor of his new abode, 
He vow'd the laurel to the laurel's god. 
It happen'd once (a boding prodigy!) 
A swarm of bees, that cut the liquid sky, 
(Unknown from whence they took their airy flight,) 
Upon the topmost branch in clouds alight; 
There with their clasping feet together clung, 
And a long cluster from the laurel hung. 
An ancient augur prophesied from hence: 
"Behold on Latian shores a foreign prince! 
From the same parts of heav'n his navy stands, 
To the same parts on earth; his army lands; 
The town he conquers, and the tow'r commands." 
Yet more, when fair Lavinia fed the fire 
Before the gods, and stood beside her sire, 
(Strange to relate!) the flames, involv'd in smoke 
Of incense, from the sacred altar broke, 
Caught her dishevel'd hair and rich attire; 
Her crown and jewels crackled in the fire: 
From thence the fuming trail began to spread 
And lambent glories danc'd about her head. 
This new portent the seer with wonder views, 
Then pausing, thus his prophecy renews: 
"The nymph, who scatters flaming fires around, 
Shall shine with honor, shall herself be crown'd; 
But, caus'd by her irrevocable fate, 
War shall the country waste, and change the state." 
Latinus, frighted with this dire ostent, 
For counsel to his father Faunus went, 
And sought the shades renown'd for prophecy 
Which near Albunea's sulph'rous fountain lie. 
To these the Latian and the Sabine land 
Fly, when distress'd, and thence relief demand. 
The priest on skins of off'rings takes his ease, 
And nightly visions in his slumber sees; 
A swarm of thin aerial shapes appears, 
And, flutt'ring round his temples, deafs his ears: 
These he consults, the future fates to know, 
From pow'rs above, and from the fiends below. 
Here, for the gods' advice, Latinus flies, 
Off'ring a hundred sheep for sacrifice: 
Their woolly fleeces, as the rites requir'd, 
He laid beneath him, and to rest retir'd. 
No sooner were his eyes in slumber bound, 
When, from above, a more than mortal sound 
Invades his ears; and thus the vision spoke: 
"Seek not, my seed, in Latian bands to yoke 
Our fair Lavinia, nor the gods provoke. 
A foreign son upon thy shore descends, 
Whose martial fame from pole to pole extends. 
His race, in arms and arts of peace renown'd, 
Not Latium shall contain, nor Europe bound: 
'T is theirs whate'er the sun surveys around." 
These answers, in the silent night receiv'd, 
The king himself divulg'd, the land believ'd: 
The fame thro' all the neighb'ring nations flew, 
When now the Trojan navy was in view. 
Beneath a shady tree, the hero spread 
His table on the turf, with cakes of bread; 
And, with his chiefs, on forest fruits he fed. 
They sate; and, (not without the god's command,) 
Their homely fare dispatch'd, the hungry band 
Invade their trenchers next, and soon devour, 
To mend the scanty meal, their cakes of flour. 
Ascanius this observ'd, and smiling said: 
"See, we devour the plates on which we fed." 
The speech had omen, that the Trojan race 
Should find repose, and this the time and place. 
Aeneas took the word, and thus replies, 
Confessing fate with wonder in his eyes: 
"All hail, O earth! all hail, my household gods! 
Behold the destin'd place of your abodes! 
For thus Anchises prophesied of old, 
And this our fatal place of rest foretold: 
'When, on a foreign shore, instead of meat, 
By famine forc'd, your trenchers you shall eat, 
Then ease your weary Trojans will attend, 
And the long labors of your voyage end. 
Remember on that happy coast to build, 
And with a trench inclose the fruitful field.' 
This was that famine, this the fatal place 
Which ends the wand'ring of our exil'd race. 
Then, on to-morrow's dawn, your care employ, 
To search the land, and where the cities lie, 
And what the men; but give this day to joy. 
Now pour to Jove; and, after Jove is blest, 
Call great Anchises to the genial feast: 
Crown high the goblets with a cheerful draught; 
Enjoy the present hour; adjourn the future thought." 
Thus having said, the hero bound his brows 
With leafy branches, then perform'd his vows; 
Adoring first the genius of the place, 
Then Earth, the mother of the heav'nly race, 
The nymphs, and native godheads yet unknown, 
And Night, and all the stars that gild her sable throne,

And ancient Cybel, and Idaean Jove, 
And last his sire below, and mother queen above. 
Then heav'n's high monarch thunder'd thrice aloud, 
And thrice he shook aloft a golden cloud. 
Soon thro' the joyful camp a rumor flew, 
The time was come their city to renew. 
Then ev'ry brow with cheerful green is crown'd, 
The feasts are doubled, and the bowls go round. 
When next the rosy morn disclos'd the day, 
The scouts to sev'ral parts divide their way, 
To learn the natives' names, their towns explore, 
The coasts and trendings of the crooked shore: 
Here Tiber flows, and here Numicus stands; 
Here warlike Latins hold the happy lands. 
The pious chief, who sought by peaceful ways 
To found his empire, and his town to raise, 
A hundred youths from all his train selects, 
And to the Latian court their course directs, 
(The spacious palace where their prince resides,) 
And all their heads with wreaths of olive hides. 
They go commission'd to require a peace, 
And carry presents to procure access. 
Thus while they speed their pace, the prince designs 
His new-elected seat, and draws the lines. 
The Trojans round the place a rampire cast, 
And palisades about the trenches plac'd. 
Meantime the train, proceeding on their way, 
From far the town and lofty tow'rs survey; 
At length approach the walls. Without the gate, 
They see the boys and Latian youth debate 
The martial prizes on the dusty plain: 
Some drive the cars, and some the coursers rein; 
Some bend the stubborn bow for victory, 
And some with darts their active sinews try. 
A posting messenger, dispatch'd from hence, 
Of this fair troop advis'd their aged prince, 
That foreign men of mighty stature came; 
Uncouth their habit, and unknown their name. 
The king ordains their entrance, and ascends 
His regal seat, surrounded by his friends. 
The palace built by Picus, vast and proud, 
Supported by a hundred pillars stood, 
And round incompass'd with a rising wood. 
The pile o'erlook'd the town, and drew the sight; 
Surpris'd at once with reverence and delight. 
There kings receiv'd the marks of sov'reign pow'r; 
In state the monarchs march'd; the lictors bore 
Their awful axes and the rods before. 
Here the tribunal stood, the house of pray'r, 
And here the sacred senators repair; 
All at large tables, in long order set, 
A ram their off'ring, and a ram their meat. 
Above the portal, carv'd in cedar wood, 
Plac'd in their ranks, their godlike grandsires stood; 
Old Saturn, with his crooked scythe, on high; 
And Italus, that led the colony; 
And ancient Janus, with his double face, 
And bunch of keys, the porter of the place. 
There good Sabinus, planter of the vines, 
On a short pruning hook his head reclines, 
And studiously surveys his gen'rous wines; 
Then warlike kings, who for their country fought, 
And honorable wounds from battle brought. 
Around the posts hung helmets, darts, and spears, 
And captive chariots, axes, shields, and bars, 
And broken beaks of ships, the trophies of their wars. 
Above the rest, as chief of all the band, 
Was Picus plac'd, a buckler in his hand; 
His other wav'd a long divining wand. 
Girt in his Gabin gown the hero sate, 
Yet could not with his art avoid his fate: 
For Circe long had lov'd the youth in vain, 
Till love, refus'd, converted to disdain: 
Then, mixing pow'rful herbs, with magic art, 
She chang'd his form, who could not change his heart; 
Constrain'd him in a bird, and made him fly, 
With party-color'd plumes, a chatt'ring pie. 
In this high temple, on a chair of state, 
The seat of audience, old Latinus sate; 
Then gave admission to the Trojan train; 
And thus with pleasing accents he began: 
"Tell me, ye Trojans, for that name you own, 
Nor is your course upon our coasts unknown- 
Say what you seek, and whither were you bound: 
Were you by stress of weather cast aground? 
(Such dangers as on seas are often seen, 
And oft befall to miserable men,) 
Or come, your shipping in our ports to lay, 
Spent and disabled in so long a way? 
Say what you want: the Latians you shall find 
Not forc'd to goodness, but by will inclin'd; 
For, since the time of Saturn's holy reign, 
His hospitable customs we retain. 
I call to mind (but time the tale has worn) 
Th' Arunci told, that Dardanus, tho' born 
On Latian plains, yet sought the Phrygian shore, 
And Samothracia, Samos call'd before. 
From Tuscan Coritum he claim'd his birth; 
But after, when exempt from mortal earth, 
From thence ascended to his kindred skies, 
A god, and, as a god, augments their sacrifice," 
He said. Ilioneus made this reply: 
"O king, of Faunus' royal family! 
Nor wintry winds to Latium forc'd our way, 
Nor did the stars our wand'ring course betray. 
Willing we sought your shores; and, hither bound, 
The port, so long desir'd, at length we found; 
From our sweet homes and ancient realms expell'd; 
Great as the greatest that the sun beheld. 
The god began our line, who rules above; 
And, as our race, our king descends from Jove: 
And hither are we come, by his command, 
To crave admission in your happy land. 
How dire a tempest, from Mycenae pour'd, 
Our plains, our temples, and our town devour'd; 
What was the waste of war, what fierce alarms 
Shook Asia's crown with European arms; 
Ev'n such have heard, if any such there be, 
Whose earth is bounded by the frozen sea; 
And such as, born beneath the burning sky 
And sultry sun, betwixt the tropics lie. 
From that dire deluge, thro' the wat'ry waste, 
Such length of years, such various perils past, 
At last escap'd, to Latium we repair, 
To beg what you without your want may spare: 
The common water, and the common air; 
Sheds which ourselves will build, and mean abodes, 
Fit to receive and serve our banish'd gods. 
Nor our admission shall your realm disgrace, 
Nor length of time our gratitude efface. 
Besides, what endless honor you shall gain, 
To save and shelter Troy's unhappy train! 
Now, by my sov'reign, and his fate, I swear, 
Renown'd for faith in peace, for force in war; 
Oft our alliance other lands desir'd, 
And, what we seek of you, of us requir'd. 
Despite not then, that in our hands we bear 
These holy boughs, sue with words of pray'r. 
Fate and the gods, by their supreme command, 
Have doom'd our ships to seek the Latian land. 
To these abodes our fleet Apollo sends; 
Here Dardanus was born, and hither tends; 
Where Tuscan Tiber rolls with rapid force, 
And where Numicus opes his holy source. 
Besides, our prince presents, with his request, 
Some small remains of what his sire possess'd. 
This golden charger, snatch'd from burning Troy, 
Anchises did in sacrifice employ; 
This royal robe and this tiara wore 
Old Priam, and this golden scepter bore 
In full assemblies, and in solemn games; 
These purple vests were weav'd by Dardan dames." 
Thus while he spoke, Latinus roll'd around 
His eyes, and fix'd a while upon the ground. 
Intent he seem'd, and anxious in his breast; 
Not by the scepter mov'd, or kingly vest, 
But pond'ring future things of wondrous weight; 
Succession, empire, and his daughter's fate. 
On these he mus'd within his thoughtful mind, 
And then revolv'd what Faunus had divin'd. 
This was the foreign prince, by fate decreed 
To share his scepter, and Lavinia's bed; 
This was the race that sure portents foreshew 
To sway the world, and land and sea subdue. 
At length he rais'd his cheerful head, and spoke: 
"The pow'rs," said he, "the pow'rs we both invoke, 
To you, and yours, and mine, propitious be, 
And firm our purpose with their augury! 
Have what you ask; your presents I receive; 
Land, where and when you please, with ample leave; 
Partake and use my kingdom as your own; 
All shall be yours, while I command the crown: 
And, if my wish'd alliance please your king, 
Tell him he should not send the peace, but bring. 
Then let him not a friend's embraces fear; 
The peace is made when I behold him here. 
Besides this answer, tell my royal guest, 
I add to his commands my own request: 
One only daughter heirs my crown and state, 
Whom not our oracles, nor Heav'n, nor fate, 
Nor frequent prodigies, permit to join 
With any native of th' Ausonian line. 
A foreign son-in-law shall come from far 
(Such is our doom), a chief renown'd in war, 
Whose race shall bear aloft the Latian name, 
And thro' the conquer'd world diffuse our fame. 
Himself to be the man the fates require, 
I firmly judge, and, what I judge, desire." 
He said, and then on each bestow'd a steed. 
Three hundred horses, in high stables fed, 
Stood ready, shining all, and smoothly dress'd: 
Of these he chose the fairest and the best, 
To mount the Trojan troop. At his command 
The steeds caparison'd with purple stand, 
With golden trappings, glorious to behold, 
And champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold. 
Then to his absent guest the king decreed 
A pair of coursers born of heav'nly breed, 
Who from their nostrils breath'd ethereal fire; 
Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire, 
By substituting mares produc'd on earth, 
Whose wombs conceiv'd a more than mortal birth. 
These draw the chariot which Latinus sends, 
And the rich present to the prince commends. 
Sublime on stately steeds the Trojans borne, 
To their expecting lord with peace return. 
But jealous Juno, from Pachynus' height, 
As she from Argos took her airy flight, 
Beheld with envious eyes this hateful sight. 
She saw the Trojan and his joyful train 
Descend upon the shore, desert the main, 
Design a town, and, with unhop'd success, 
Th' embassadors return with promis'd peace. 
Then, pierc'd with pain, she shook her haughty head, 
Sigh'd from her inward soul, and thus she said: 
"O hated offspring of my Phrygian foes! 
O fates of Troy, which Juno's fates oppose! 
Could they not fall unpitied on the plain, 
But slain revive, and, taken, scape again? 
When execrable Troy in ashes lay, 
Thro' fires and swords and seas they forc'd their way. 
Then vanquish'd Juno must in vain contend, 
Her rage disarm'd, her empire at an end. 
Breathless and tir'd, is all my fury spent? 
Or does my glutted spleen at length relent? 
As if 't were little from their town to chase, 
I thro' the seas pursued their exil'd race; 
Ingag'd the heav'ns, oppos'd the stormy main; 
But billows roar'd, and tempests rag'd in vain. 
What have my Scyllas and my Syrtes done, 
When these they overpass, and those they shun? 
On Tiber's shores they land, secure of fate, 
Triumphant o'er the storms and Juno's hate. 
Mars could in mutual blood the Centaurs bathe, 
And Jove himself gave way to Cynthia's wrath, 
Who sent the tusky boar to Calydon; 
(What great offense had either people done?) 
But I, the consort of the Thunderer, 
Have wag'd a long and unsuccessful war, 
With various arts and arms in vain have toil'd, 
And by a mortal man at length am foil'd. 
If native pow'r prevail not, shall I doubt 
To seek for needful succor from without? 
If Jove and Heav'n my just desires deny, 
Hell shall the pow'r of Heav'n and Jove supply. 
Grant that the Fates have firm'd, by their decree, 
The Trojan race to reign in Italy; 
At least I can defer the nuptial day, 
And with protracted wars the peace delay: 
With blood the dear alliance shall be bought, 
And both the people near destruction brought; 
So shall the son-in-law and father join, 
With ruin, war, and waste of either line. 
O fatal maid, thy marriage is endow'd 
With Phrygian, Latian, andRutulian blood! 
Bellona leads thee to thy lover's hand; 
Another queen brings forth another brand, 
To burn with foreign fires another land! 
A second Paris, diff'ring but in name, 
Shall fire his country with a second flame." 
Thus having said, she sinks beneath the ground, 
With furious haste, and shoots the Stygian sound, 
To rouse Alecto from th' infernal seat 
Of her dire sisters, and their dark retreat. 
This Fury, fit for her intent, she chose; 
One who delights in wars and human woes. 
Ev'n Pluto hates his own misshapen race; 
Her sister Furies fly her hideous face; 
So frightful are the forms the monster takes, 
So fierce the hissings of her speckled snakes. 
Her Juno finds, and thus inflames her spite: 
"O virgin daughter of eternal Night, 
Give me this once thy labor, to sustain 
My right, and execute my just disdain. 
Let not the Trojans, with a feign'd pretense 
Of proffer'd peace, delude the Latian prince. 
Expel from Italy that odious name, 
And let not Juno suffer in her fame. 
'T is thine to ruin realms, o'erturn a state, 
Betwixt the dearest friends to raise debate, 
And kindle kindred blood to mutual hate. 
Thy hand o'er towns the fun'ral torch displays, 
And forms a thousand ills ten thousand ways. 
Now shake, out thy fruitful breast, the seeds 
Of envy, discord, and of cruel deeds: 
Confound the peace establish'd, and prepare 
Their souls to hatred, and their hands to war." 
Smear'd as she was with black Gorgonian blood, 
The Fury sprang above the Stygian flood; 
And on her wicker wings, sublime thro' night, 
She to the Latian palace took her flight: 
There sought the queen's apartment, stood before 
The peaceful threshold, and besieg'd the door. 
Restless Amata lay, her swelling breast 
Fir'd with disdain for Turnus dispossess'd, 
And the new nuptials of the Trojan guest. 
From her black bloody locks the Fury shakes 
Her darling plague, the fav'rite of her snakes; 
With her full force she threw the poisonous dart, 
And fix'd it deep within Amata's heart, 
That, thus envenom'd, she might kindle rage, 
And sacrifice to strife her house husband's age. 
Unseen, unfelt, the fiery serpent skims 
Betwixt her linen and her naked limbs; 
His baleful breath inspiring, as he glides, 
Now like a chain around her neck he rides, 
Now like a fillet to her head repairs, 
And with his circling volumes folds her hairs. 
At first the silent venom slid with ease, 
And seiz'd her cooler senses by degrees; 
Then, ere th' infected mass was fir'd too far, 
In plaintive accents she began the war, 
And thus bespoke her husband: "Shall," she said, 
"A wand'ring prince enjoy Lavinia's bed? 
If nature plead not in a parent's heart, 
Pity my tears, and pity her desert. 
I know, my dearest lord, the time will come, 
You in vain, reverse your cruel doom; 
The faithless pirate soon will set to sea, 
And bear the royal virgin far away! 
A guest like him, a Trojan guest before, 
In shew of friendship sought the Spartan shore, 
And ravish'd Helen from her husband bore. 
Think on a king's inviolable word; 
And think on Turnus, her once plighted lord: 
To this false foreigner you give your throne, 
And wrong a friend, a kinsman, and a son. 
Resume your ancient care; and, if the god 
Your sire, and you, resolve on foreign blood, 
Know all are foreign, in a larger sense, 
Not born your subjects, or deriv'd from hence. 
Then, if the line of Turnus you retrace, 
He springs from Inachus of Argive race." 
But when she saw her reasons idly spent, 
And could not move him from his fix'd intent, 
She flew to rage; for now the snake possess'd 
Her vital parts, and poison'd all her breast; 
She raves, she runs with a distracted pace, 
And fills with horrid howls the public place. 
And, as young striplings whip the top for sport, 
On the smooth pavement of an empty court; 
The wooden engine flies and whirls about, 
Admir'd, with clamors, of the beardless rout; 
They lash aloud; each other they provoke, 
And lend their little souls at ev'ry stroke: 
Thus fares the queen; and thus her fury blows 
Amidst the crowd, and kindles as she goes. 
Nor yet content, she strains her malice more, 
And adds new ills to those contriv'd before: 
She flies the town, and, mixing with a throng 
Of madding matrons, bears the bride along, 
Wand'ring thro' woods and wilds, and devious ways, 
And with these arts the Trojan match delays. 
She feign'd the rites of Bacchus; cried aloud, 
And to the buxom god the virgin vow'd. 
"Evoe! O Bacchus!" thus began the song; 
And "Evoe!" answer'd all the female throng. 
"O virgin! worthy thee alone!" she cried; 
"O worthy thee alone!" the crew replied. 
"For thee she feeds her hair, she leads thy dance, 
And with thy winding ivy wreathes her lance." 
Like fury seiz'd the rest; the progress known, 
All seek the mountains, and forsake the town: 
All, clad in skins of beasts, the jav'lin bear, 
Give to the wanton winds their flowing hair, 
And shrieks and shoutings rend the suff'ring air. 
The queen herself, inspir'd with rage divine, 
Shook high above her head a flaming pine; 
Then roll'd her haggard eyes around the throng, 
And sung, in Turnus' name, the nuptial song: 
"Io, ye Latian dames! if any here 
Hold your unhappy queen, Amata, dear; 
If there be here," she said, who dare maintain 
My right, nor think the name of mother vain; 
Unbind your fillets, loose your flowing hair, 
And orgies and nocturnal rites prepare." 
Amata's breast the Fury thus invades, 
And fires with rage, amid the sylvan shades; 
Then, when she found her venom spread so far, 
The royal house embroil'd in civil war, 
Rais'd on her dusky wings, she cleaves the skies, 
And seeks the palace where young Turnus lies. 
His town, as fame reports, was built of old 
By Danae, pregnant with almighty gold, 
Who fled her father's rage, and, with a train 
Of following Argives, thro' the stormy main, 
Driv'n by the southern blasts, was fated here to reign. 
'T was Ardua once; now Ardea's name it bears; 
Once a fair city, now consum'd with years. 
Here, in his lofty palace, Turnus lay, 
Betwixt the confines of the night and day, 
Secure in sleep. The Fury laid aside 
Her looks and limbs, and with new methods tried 
The foulness of th' infernal form to hide. 
Propp'd on a staff, she takes a trembling mien: 
Her face is furrow'd, and her front obscene; 
Deep-dinted wrinkles on her cheek she draws; 
Sunk are her eyes, and toothless are her jaws; 
Her hoary hair with holy fillets bound, 
Her temples with an olive wreath are crown'd. 
Old Chalybe, who kept the sacred fane 
Of Juno, now she seem'd, and thus began, 
Appearing in a dream, to rouse the careless man: 
"Shall Turnus then such endless toil sustain 
In fighting fields, and conquer towns in vain? 
Win, for a Trojan head to wear the prize, 
Usurp thy crown, enjoy thy victories? 
The bride and scepter which thy blood has bought, 
The king transfers; and foreign heirs are sought. 
Go now, deluded man, and seek again 
New toils, new dangers, on the dusty plain. 
Repel the Tuscan foes; their city seize; 
Protect the Latians in luxurious ease. 
This dream all-pow'rful Juno sends; I bear 
Her mighty mandates, and her words you hear. 
Haste; arm your Ardeans; issue to the plain; 
With fate to friend, assault the Trojan train: 
Their thoughtless chiefs, their painted ships, that lie 
In Tiber's mouth, with fire and sword destroy. 
The Latian king, unless he shall submit, 
Own his old promise, and his new forget- 
Let him, in arms, the pow'r of Turnus prove, 
And learn to fear whom he disdains to love. 
For such is Heav'n's command." The youthful prince 
With scorn replied, and made this bold defense: 
"You tell me, mother, what I knew before: 
The Phrygian fleet is landed on the shore. 
I neither fear nor will provoke the war; 
My fate is Juno's most peculiar care. 
But time has made you dote, and vainly tell 
Of arms imagin'd in your lonely cell. 
Go; be the temple and the gods your care; 
Permit to men the thought of peace and war." 
These haughty words Alecto's rage provoke, 
And frighted Turnus trembled as she spoke. 
Her eyes grow stiffen'd, and with sulphur burn; 
Her hideous looks and hellish form return; 
Her curling snakes with hissings fill the place, 
And open all the furies of her face: 
Then, darting fire from her malignant eyes, 
She cast him backward as he strove to rise, 
And, ling'ring, sought to frame some new replies. 
High on her head she rears two twisted snakes, 
Her chains she rattles, and her whip she shakes; 
And, churning bloody foam, thus loudly speaks: 
"Behold whom time has made to dote, and tell 
Of arms imagin'd in her lonely cell! 
Behold the Fates' infernal minister! 
War, death, destruction, in my hand I bear." 
Thus having said, her smold'ring torch, impress'd 
With her full force, she plung'd into his breast. 
Aghast he wak'd; and, starting from his bed, 
Cold sweat, in clammy drops, his limbs o'erspread. 
"Arms! arms!" he cries: "my sword and shield prepare!" 
He breathes defiance, blood, and mortal war. 
So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries, 
The bubbling waters from the bottom rise: 
Above the brims they force their fiery way; 
Black vapors climb aloft, and cloud the day. 
The peace polluted thus, a chosen band 
He first commissions to the Latian land, 
In threat'ning embassy; then rais'd the rest, 
To meet in arms th' intruding Trojan guest, 
To force the foes from the Lavinian shore, 
And Italy's indanger'd peace restore. 
Himself alone an equal match he boasts, 
To fight the Phrygian and Ausonian hosts. 
The gods invok'd, the Rutuli prepare 
Their arms, and warn each other to the war. 
His beauty these, and those his blooming age, 
The rest his house and his own fame ingage. 
While Turnus urges thus his enterprise, 
The Stygian Fury to the Trojans flies; 
New frauds invents, and takes a steepy stand, 
Which overlooks the vale with wide command; 
Where fair Ascanius and his youthful train, 
With horns and hounds, a hunting match ordain, 
And pitch their toils around the shady plain. 
The Fury fires the pack; they snuff, they vent, 
And feed their hungry nostrils with the scent. 
'Twas of a well-grown stag, whose antlers rise 
High o'er his front; his beams invade the skies. 
From this light cause th' infernal maid prepares 
The country churls to mischief, hate, and wars. 
The stately beast the two Tyrrhidae bred, 
Snatch'd from his dams, and the tame youngling fed. 
Their father Tyrrheus did his fodder bring, 
Tyrrheus, chief ranger to the Latian king: 
Their sister Silvia cherish'd with her care 
The little wanton, and did wreaths prepare 
To hang his budding horns, with ribbons tied 
His tender neck, and comb'd his silken hide, 
And bathed his body. Patient of command 
In time he grew, and, growing us'd to hand, 
He waited at his master's board for food; 
Then sought his salvage kindred in the wood, 
Where grazing all the day, at night he came 
To his known lodgings, and his country dame. 
This household beast, that us'd the woodland grounds, 
Was view'd at first by the young hero's hounds, 
As down the stream he swam, to seek retreat 
In the cool waters, and to quench his heat. 
Ascanius young, and eager of his game, 
Soon bent his bow, uncertain in his aim; 
But the dire fiend the fatal arrow guides, 
Which pierc'd his bowels thro' his panting sides. 
The bleeding creature issues from the floods, 
Possess'd with fear, and seeks his known abodes, 
His old familiar hearth and household gods. 
He falls; he fills the house with heavy groans, 
Implores their pity, and his pain bemoans. 
Young Silvia beats her breast, and cries aloud 
For succor from the clownish neighborhood: 
The churls assemble; for the fiend, who lay 
In the close woody covert, urg'd their way. 
One with a brand yet burning from the flame, 
Arm'd with a knotty club another came: 
Whate'er they catch or find, without their care, 
Their fury makes an instrument of war. 
Tyrrheus, the foster father of the beast, 
Then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fist, 
But held his hand from the descending stroke, 
And left his wedge within the cloven oak, 
To whet their courage and their rage provoke. 
And now the goddess, exercis'd in ill, 
Who watch'd an hour to work her impious will, 
Ascends the roof, and to her crooked horn, 
Such as was then by Latian shepherds borne, 
Adds all her breath: the rocks and woods around, 
And mountains, tremble at th' infernal sound. 
The sacred lake of Trivia from afar, 
The Veline fountains, and sulphureous Nar, 
Shake at the baleful blast, the signal of the war. 
Young mothers wildly stare, with fear possess'd, 
And strain their helpless infants to their breast. 
The clowns, a boist'rous, rude, ungovern'd crew, 
With furious haste to the loud summons flew. 
The pow'rs of Troy, then issuing on the plain, 
With fresh recruits their youthful chief sustain: 
Not theirs a raw and unexperienc'd train, 
But a firm body of embattled men. 
At first, while fortune favor'd neither side, 
The fight with clubs and burning brands was tried; 
But now, both parties reinforc'd, the fields 
Are bright with flaming swords and brazen shields. 
A shining harvest either host displays, 
And shoots against the sun with equal rays. 
Thus, when a black-brow'd gust begins to rise, 
White foam at first on the curl'd ocean fries; 
Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies; 
Till, by the fury of the storm full blown, 
The muddy bottom o'er the clouds is thrown. 
First Almon falls, old Tyrrheus' eldest care, 
Pierc'd with an arrow from the distant war: 
Fix'd in his throat the flying weapon stood, 
And stopp'd his breath, and drank his vital blood 
Huge heaps of slain around the body rise: 
Among the rest, the rich Galesus lies; 
A good old man, while peace he preach'd in vain, 
Amidst the madness of th' unruly train: 
Five herds, five bleating flocks, his pastures fill'd; 
His lands a hundred yoke of oxen till'd. 
Thus, while in equal scales their fortune stood 
The Fury bath'd them in each other's blood; 
Then, having fix'd the fight, exulting flies, 
And bears fulfill'd her promise to the skies. 
To Juno thus she speaks: "Behold! It is done, 
The blood already drawn, the war begun; 
The discord is complete; nor can they cease 
The dire debate, nor you command the peace. 
Now, since the Latian and the Trojan brood 
Have tasted vengeance and the sweets of blood; 
Speak, and my pow'r shall add this office more: 
The neighb'ing nations of th' Ausonian shore 
Shall hear the dreadful rumor, from afar, 
Of arm'd invasion, and embrace the war." 
Then Juno thus: "The grateful work is done, 
The seeds of discord sow'd, the war begun; 
Frauds, fears, and fury have possess'd the state, 
And fix'd the causes of a lasting hate. 
A bloody Hymen shall th' alliance join 
Betwixt the Trojan and Ausonian line: 
But thou with speed to night and hell repair; 
For not the gods, nor angry Jove, will bear 
Thy lawless wand'ring walks in upper air. 
Leave what remains to me." Saturnia said: 
The sullen fiend her sounding wings display'd, 
Unwilling left the light, and sought the nether shade. 
In midst of Italy, well known to fame, 
There lies a lake (Amsanctus is the name) 
Below the lofty mounts: on either side 
Thick forests the forbidden entrance hide. 
Full in the center of the sacred wood 
An arm arises of the Stygian flood, 
Which, breaking from beneath with bellowing sound, 
Whirls the black waves and rattling stones around. 
Here Pluto pants for breath from out his cell, 
And opens wide the grinning jaws of hell. 
To this infernal lake the Fury flies; 
Here hides her hated head, and frees the lab'ring skies.

Saturnian Juno now, with double care, 
Attends the fatal process of the war. 
The clowns, return'd, from battle bear the slain, 
Implore the gods, and to their king complain. 
The corps of Almon and the rest are shown; 
Shrieks, clamors, murmurs, fill the frighted town. 
Ambitious Turnus in the press appears, 
And, aggravating crimes, augments their fears; 
Proclaims his private injuries aloud, 
A solemn promise made, and disavow'd; 
A foreign son is sought, and a mix'd mungril brood. 
Then they, whose mothers, frantic with their fear, 
In woods and wilds the flags of Bacchus bear, 
And lead his dances with dishevel'd hair, 
Increase the clamor, and the war demand, 
(Such was Amata's interest in the land,) 
Against the public sanctions of the peace, 
Against all omens of their ill success. 
With fates averse, the rout in arms resort, 
To force their monarch, and insult the court. 
But, like a rock unmov'd, a rock that braves 
The raging tempest and the rising waves- 
Propp'd on himself he stands; his solid sides 
Wash off the seaweeds, and the sounding tides- 
So stood the pious prince, unmov'd, and long 
Sustain'd the madness of the noisy throng. 
But, when he found that Juno's pow'r prevail'd, 
And all the methods of cool counsel fail'd, 
He calls the gods to witness their offense, 
Disclaims the war, asserts his innocence. 
"Hurried by fate," he cries, "and borne before 
A furious wind, we have the faithful shore. 
O more than madmen! you yourselves shall bear 
The guilt of blood and sacrilegious war: 
Thou, Turnus, shalt atone it by thy fate, 
And pray to Heav'n for peace, but pray too late. 
For me, my stormy voyage at an end, 
I to the port of death securely tend. 
The fun'ral pomp which to your kings you pay, 
Is all I want, and all you take away." 
He said no more, but, in his walls confin'd, 
Shut out the woes which he too well divin'd 
Nor with the rising storm would vainly strive, 
But left the helm, and let the vessel drive. 
A solemn custom was observ'd of old, 
Which Latium held, and now the Romans hold, 
Their standard when in fighting fields they rear 
Against the fierce Hyrcanians, or declare 
The Scythian, Indian, or Arabian war; 
Or from the boasting Parthians would regain 
Their eagles, lost in Carrhae's bloody plain. 
Two gates of steel (the name of Mars they bear, 
And still are worship'd with religious fear) 
Before his temple stand: the dire abode, 
And the fear'd issues of the furious god, 
Are fenc'd with brazen bolts; without the gates, 
The wary guardian Janus doubly waits. 
Then, when the sacred senate votes the wars, 
The Roman consul their decree declares, 
And in his robes the sounding gates unbars. 
The youth in military shouts arise, 
And the loud trumpets break the yielding skies. 
These rites, of old by sov'reign princes us'd, 
Were the king's office; but the king refus'd, 
Deaf to their cries, nor would the gates unbar 
Of sacred peace, or loose th' imprison'd war; 
But hid his head, and, safe from loud alarms, 
Abhorr'd the wicked ministry of arms. 
Then heav'n's imperious queen shot down from high: 
At her approach the brazen hinges fly; 
The gates are forc'd, and ev'ry falling bar; 
And, like a tempest, issues out the war. 
The peaceful cities of th' Ausonian shore, 
Lull'd in their ease, and undisturb'd before, 
Are all on fire; and some, with studious care, 
Their restiff steeds in sandy plains prepare; 
Some their soft limbs in painful marches try, 
And war is all their wish, and arms the gen'ral cry. 
Part scour the rusty shields with seam; and part 
New grind the blunted ax, and point the dart: 
With joy they view the waving ensigns fly, 
And hear the trumpet's clangor pierce the sky. 
Five cities forge their arms: th' Atinian pow'rs, 
Antemnae, Tibur with her lofty tow'rs, 
Ardea the proud, the Crustumerian town: 
All these of old were places of renown. 
Some hammer helmets for the fighting field; 
Some twine young sallows to support the shield; 
The croslet some, and some the cuishes mold, 
With silver plated, and with ductile gold. 
The rustic honors of the scythe and share 
Give place to swords and plumes, the pride of war. 
Old fauchions are new temper'd in the fires; 
The sounding trumpet ev'ry soul inspires. 
The word is giv'n; with eager speed they lace 
The shining headpiece, and the shield embrace. 
The neighing steeds are to the chariot tied; 
The trusty weapon sits on ev'ry side. 
And now the mighty labor is begun 
Ye Muses, open all your Helicon. 
Sing you the chiefs that sway'd th' Ausonian land, 
Their arms, and armies under their command; 
What warriors in our ancient clime were bred; 
What soldiers follow'd, and what heroes led. 
For well you know, and can record alone, 
What fame to future times conveys but darkly down. 
Mezentius first appear'd upon the plain: 
Scorn sate upon his brows, and sour disdain, 
Defying earth and heav'n. Etruria lost, 
He brings to Turnus' aid his baffled host. 
The charming Lausus, full of youthful fire, 
Rode in the rank, and next his sullen sire; 
To Turnus only second in the grace 
Of manly mien, and features of the face. 
A skilful horseman, and a huntsman bred, 
With fates averse a thousand men he led: 
His sire unworthy of so brave a son; 
Himself well worthy of a happier throne. 
Next Aventinus drives his chariot round 
The Latian plains, with palms and laurels crown'd. 
Proud of his steeds, he smokes along the field; 
His father's hydra fills his ample shield: 
A hundred serpents hiss about the brims; 
The son of Hercules he justly seems 
By his broad shoulders and gigantic limbs; 
Of heav'nly part, and part of earthly blood, 
A mortal woman mixing with a god. 
For strong Alcides, after he had slain 
The triple Geryon, drove from conquer'd Spain 
His captive herds; and, thence in triumph led, 
On Tuscan Tiber's flow'ry banks they fed. 
Then on Mount Aventine the son of Jove 
The priestess Rhea found, and forc'd to love. 
For arms, his men long piles and jav'lins bore; 
And poles with pointed steel their foes in battle gore. 
Like Hercules himself his son appears, 
In salvage pomp; a lion's hide he wears; 
About his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin; 
The teeth and gaping jaws severely grin. 
Thus, like the god his father, homely dress'd, 
He strides into the hall, a horrid guest. 
Then two twin brothers from fair Tibur came, 
(Which from their brother Tiburs took the name,) 
Fierce Coras and Catillus, void of fear: 
Arm'd Argive horse they led, and in the front appear. 
Like cloud-born Centaurs, from the mountain's height 
With rapid course descending to the fight; 
They rush along; the rattling woods give way; 
The branches bend before their sweepy sway. 
Nor was Praeneste's founder wanting there, 
Whom fame reports the son of Mulciber: 
Found in the fire, and foster'd in the plains, 
A shepherd and a king at once he reigns, 
And leads to Turnus' aid his country swains. 
His own Praeneste sends a chosen band, 
With those who plow Saturnia's Gabine land; 
Besides the succor which cold Anien yields, 
The rocks of Hernicus, and dewy fields, 
Anagnia fat, and Father Amasene- 
A num'rous rout, but all of naked men: 
Nor arms they wear, nor swords and bucklers wield, 
Nor drive the chariot thro' the dusty field, 
But whirl from leathern slings huge balls of lead, 
And spoils of yellow wolves adorn their head; 
The left foot naked, when they march to fight, 
But in a bull's raw hide they sheathe the right. 
Messapus next, (great Neptune was his sire,) 
Secure of steel, and fated from the fire, 
In pomp appears, and with his ardor warms 
A heartless train, unexercis'd in arms: 
The just Faliscans he to battle brings, 
And those who live where Lake Ciminia springs; 
And where Feronia's grove and temple stands, 
Who till Fescennian or Flavinian lands. 
All these in order march, and marching sing 
The warlike actions of their sea-born king; 
Like a long team of snowy swans on high, 
Which clap their wings, and cleave the liquid sky, 
When, homeward from their wat'ry pastures borne, 
They sing, and Asia's lakes their notes return. 
Not one who heard their music from afar, 
Would think these troops an army train'd to war, 
But flocks of fowl, that, when the tempests roar, 
With their hoarse gabbling seek the silent shore. 
Then Clausus came, who led a num'rous band 
Of troops embodied from the Sabine land, 
And, in himself alone, an army brought. 
'T was he, the noble Claudian race begot, 
The Claudian race, ordain'd, in times to come, 
To share the greatness of imperial Rome. 
He led the Cures forth, of old renown, 
Mutuscans from their olive-bearing town, 
And all th' Eretian pow'rs; besides a band 
That follow'd from Velinum's dewy land, 
And Amiternian troops, of mighty fame, 
And mountaineers, that from Severus came, 
And from the craggy cliffs of Tetrica, 
And those where yellow Tiber takes his way, 
And where Himella's wanton waters play. 
Casperia sends her arms, with those that lie 
By Fabaris, and fruitful Foruli: 
The warlike aids of Horta next appear, 
And the cold Nursians come to close the rear, 
Mix'd with the natives born of Latine blood, 
Whom Allia washes with her fatal flood. 
Not thicker billows beat the Libyan main, 
When pale Orion sets in wintry rain; 
Nor thicker harvests on rich Hermus rise, 
Or Lycian fields, when Phoebus burns the skies, 
Than stand these troops: their bucklers ring around; 
Their trampling turns the turf, and shakes the solid ground.

High in his chariot then Halesus came, 
A foe by birth to Troy's unhappy name: 
From Agamemnon born- to Turnus' aid 
A thousand men the youthful hero led, 
Who till the Massic soil, for wine renown'd, 
And fierce Auruncans from their hilly ground, 
And those who live by Sidicinian shores, 
And where with shoaly fords Vulturnus roars, 
Cales' and Osca's old inhabitants, 
And rough Saticulans, inur'd to wants: 
Light demi-lances from afar they throw, 
Fasten'd with leathern thongs, to gall the foe. 
Short crooked swords in closer fight they wear; 
And on their warding arm light bucklers bear. 
Nor Oebalus, shalt thou be left unsung, 
From nymph Semethis and old Telon sprung, 
Who then in Teleboan Capri reign'd; 
But that short isle th' ambitious youth disdain'd, 
And o'er Campania stretch'd his ample sway, 
Where swelling Sarnus seeks the Tyrrhene sea; 
O'er Batulum, and where Abella sees, 
From her high tow'rs, the harvest of her trees. 
And these (as was the Teuton use of old) 
Wield brazen swords, and brazen bucklers hold; 
Sling weighty stones, when from afar they fight; 
Their casques are cork, a covering thick and light. 
Next these in rank, the warlike Ufens went, 
And led the mountain troops that Nursia sent. 
The rude Equicolae his rule obey'd; 
Hunting their sport, and plund'ring was their trade. 
In arms they plow'd, to battle still prepar'd: 
Their soil was barren, and their hearts were hard. 
Umbro the priest the proud Marrubians led, 
By King Archippus sent to Turnus' aid, 
And peaceful olives crown'd his hoary head. 
His wand and holy words, the viper's rage, 
And venom'd wounds of serpents could assuage. 
He, when he pleas'd with powerful juice to steep 
Their temples, shut their eyes in pleasing sleep. 
But vain were Marsian herbs, and magic art, 
To cure the wound giv'n by the Dardan dart: 
Yet his untimely fate th' Angitian woods 
In sighs remurmur'd to the Fucine floods. 
The son of fam'd Hippolytus was there, 
Fam'd as his sire, and, as his mother, fair; 
Whom in Egerian groves Aricia bore, 
And nurs'd his youth along the marshy shore, 
Where great Diana's peaceful altars flame, 
In fruitful fields; and Virbius was his name. 
Hippolytus, as old records have said, 
Was by his stepdam sought to share her bed; 
But, when no female arts his mind could move, 
She turn'd to furious hate her impious love. 
Torn by wild horses on the sandy shore, 
Another's crimes th' unhappy hunter bore, 
Glutting his father's eyes with guiltless gore. 
But chaste Diana, who his death deplor'd, 
With Aesculapian herbs his life restor'd. 
Then Jove, who saw from high, with just disdain, 
The dead inspir'd with vital breath again, 
Struck to the center, with his flaming dart, 
Th' unhappy founder of the godlike art. 
But Trivia kept in secret shades alone 
Her care, Hippolytus, to fate unknown; 
And call'd him Virbius in th' Egerian grove, 
Where then he liv'd obscure, but safe from Jove. 
For this, from Trivia's temple and her wood 
Are coursers driv'n, who shed their master's blood, 
Affrighted by the monsters of the flood. 
His son, the second Virbius, yet retain'd 
His father's art, and warrior steeds he rein'd. 
Amid the troops, and like the leading god, 
High o'er the rest in arms the graceful Turnus rode: 
A triple of plumes his crest adorn'd, 
On which with belching flames Chimaera burn'd: 
The more the kindled combat rises high'r, 
The more with fury burns the blazing fire. 
Fair Io grac'd his shield; but Io now 
With horns exalted stands, and seems to low- 
A noble charge! Her keeper by her side, 
To watch her walks, his hundred eyes applied; 
And on the brims her sire, the wat'ry god, 
Roll'd from a silver urn his crystal flood. 
A cloud of foot succeeds, and fills the fields 
With swords, and pointed spears, and clatt'ring shields;

Of Argives, and of old Sicanian bands, 
And those who plow the rich Rutulian lands; 
Auruncan youth, and those Sacrana yields, 
And the proud Labicans, with painted shields, 
And those who near Numician streams reside, 
And those whom Tiber's holy forests hide, 
Or Circe's hills from the main land divide; 
Where Ufens glides along the lowly lands, 
Or the black water of Pomptina stands. 
Last, from the Volscians fair Camilla came, 
And led her warlike troops, a warrior dame; 
Unbred to spinning, in the loom unskill'd, 
She chose the nobler Pallas of the field. 
Mix'd with the first, the fierce virago fought, 
Sustain'd the toils of arms, the danger sought, 
Outstripp'd the winds in speed upon the plain, 
Flew o'er the fields, nor hurt the bearded grain: 
She swept the seas, and, as she skimm'd along, 
Her flying feet unbath'd on billows hung. 
Men, boys, and women, stupid with surprise, 
Where'er she passes, fix their wond'ring eyes: 
Longing they look, and, gaping at the sight, 
Devour her o'er and o'er with vast delight; 
Her purple habit sits with such a grace 
On her smooth shoulders, and so suits her face; 
Her head with ringlets of her hair is crown'd, 
And in a golden caul the curls are bound. 
She shakes her myrtle jav'lin; and, behind, 
Her Lycian quiver dances in the wind. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VIII

When Turnus had assembled all his pow'rs, 
His standard planted on Laurentum's tow'rs; 
When now the sprightly trumpet, from afar, 
Had giv'n the signal of approaching war, 
Had rous'd the neighing steeds to scour the fields, 
While the fierce riders clatter'd on their shields; 
Trembling with rage, the Latian youth prepare 
To join th' allies, and headlong rush to war. 
Fierce Ufens, and Messapus, led the crowd, 
With bold Mezentius, who blasphem'd aloud. 
These thro' the country took their wasteful course, 
The fields to forage, and to gather force. 
Then Venulus to Diomede they send, 
To beg his aid Ausonia to defend, 
Declare the common danger, and inform 
The Grecian leader of the growing storm: 
Aeneas, landed on the Latian coast, 
With banish'd gods, and with a baffled host, 
Yet now aspir'd to conquest of the state, 
And claim'd a title from the gods and fate; 
What num'rous nations in his quarrel came, 
And how they spread his formidable name. 
What he design'd, what mischief might arise, 
If fortune favor'd his first enterprise, 
Was left for him to weigh, whose equal fears, 
And common interest, was involv'd in theirs. 
While Turnus and th' allies thus urge the war, 
The Trojan, floating in a flood of care, 
Beholds the tempest which his foes prepare. 
This way and that he turns his anxious mind; 
Thinks, and rejects the counsels he design'd; 
Explores himself in vain, in ev'ry part, 
And gives no rest to his distracted heart. 
So, when the sun by day, or moon by night, 
Strike on the polish'd brass their trembling light, 
The glitt'ring species here and there divide, 
And cast their dubious beams from side to side; 
Now on the walls, now on the pavement play, 
And to the ceiling flash the glaring day. 
'T was night; and weary nature lull'd asleep 
The birds of air, and fishes of the deep, 
And beasts, and mortal men. The Trojan chief 
Was laid on Tiber's banks, oppress'd with grief, 
And found in silent slumber late relief. 
Then, thro' the shadows of the poplar wood, 
Arose the father of the Roman flood; 
An azure robe was o'er his body spread, 
A wreath of shady reeds adorn'd his head: 
Thus, manifest to sight, the god appear'd, 
And with these pleasing words his sorrow cheer'd: 
"Undoubted offspring of ethereal race, 
O long expected in this promis'd place! 
Who thro' the foes hast borne thy banish'd gods, 
Restor'd them to their hearths, and old abodes; 
This is thy happy home, the clime where fate 
Ordains thee to restore the Trojan state. 
Fear not! The war shall end in lasting peace, 
And all the rage of haughty Juno cease. 
And that this nightly vision may not seem 
Th' effect of fancy, or an idle dream, 
A sow beneath an oak shall lie along, 
All white herself, and white her thirty young. 
When thirty rolling years have run their race, 
Thy son Ascanius, on this empty space, 
Shall build a royal town, of lasting fame, 
Which from this omen shall receive the name. 
Time shall approve the truth. For what remains, 
And how with sure success to crown thy pains, 
With patience next attend. A banish'd band, 
Driv'n with Evander from th' Arcadian land, 
Have planted here, and plac'd on high their walls; 
Their town the founder Pallanteum calls, 
Deriv'd from Pallas, his great-grandsire's name: 
But the fierce Latians old possession claim, 
With war infesting the new colony. 
These make thy friends, and on their aid rely. 
To thy free passage I submit my streams. 
Wake, son of Venus, from thy pleasing dreams; 
And, when the setting stars are lost in day, 
To Juno's pow'r thy just devotion pay; 
With sacrifice the wrathful queen appease: 
Her pride at length shall fall, her fury cease. 
When thou return'st victorious from the war, 
Perform thy vows to me with grateful care. 
The god am I, whose yellow water flows 
Around these fields, and fattens as it goes: 
Tiber my name; among the rolling floods 
Renown'd on earth, esteem'd among the gods. 
This is my certain seat. In times to come, 
My waves shall wash the walls of mighty Rome." 
He said, and plung'd below. While yet he spoke, 
His dream Aeneas and his sleep forsook. 
He rose, and looking up, beheld the skies 
With purple blushing, and the day arise. 
Then water in his hollow palm he took 
From Tiber's flood, and thus the pow'rs bespoke: 
"Laurentian nymphs, by whom the streams are fed, 
And Father Tiber, in thy sacred bed 
Receive Aeneas, and from danger keep. 
Whatever fount, whatever holy deep, 
Conceals thy wat'ry stores; where'er they rise, 
And, bubbling from below, salute the skies; 
Thou, king of horned floods, whose plenteous urn 
Suffices fatness to the fruitful corn, 
For this thy kind compassion of our woes, 
Shalt share my morning song and ev'ning vows. 
But, O be present to thy people's aid, 
And firm the gracious promise thou hast made!" 
Thus having said, two galleys from his stores, 
With care he chooses, mans, and fits with oars. 
Now on the shore the fatal swine is found. 
Wondrous to tell!- She lay along the ground: 
Her well-fed offspring at her udders hung; 
She white herself, and white her thirty young. 
Aeneas takes the mother and her brood, 
And all on Juno's altar are bestow'd. 
The foll'wing night, and the succeeding day, 
Propitious Tiber smooth'd his wat'ry way: 
He roll'd his river back, and pois'd he stood, 
A gentle swelling, and a peaceful flood. 
The Trojans mount their ships; they put from shore, 
Borne on the waves, and scarcely dip an oar. 
Shouts from the land give omen to their course, 
And the pitch'd vessels glide with easy force. 
The woods and waters wonder at the gleam 
Of shields, and painted ships that stem the stream. 
One summer's night and one whole day they pass 
Betwixt the greenwood shades, and cut the liquid glass. 
The fiery sun had finish'd half his race, 
Look'd back, and doubted in the middle space, 
When they from far beheld the rising tow'rs, 
The tops of sheds, and shepherds' lowly bow'rs, 
Thin as they stood, which, then of homely clay, 
Now rise in marble, from the Roman sway. 
These cots (Evander's kingdom, mean and poor) 
The Trojan saw, and turn'd his ships to shore. 
'T was on a solemn day: th' Arcadian states, 
The king and prince, without the city gates, 
Then paid their off'rings in a sacred grove 
To Hercules, the warrior son of Jove. 
Thick clouds of rolling smoke involve the skies, 
And fat of entrails on his altar fries. 
But, when they saw the ships that stemm'd the flood, 
And glitter'd thro' the covert of the wood, 
They rose with fear, and left th' unfinish'd feast, 
Till dauntless Pallas reassur'd the rest 
To pay the rites. Himself without delay 
A jav'lin seiz'd, and singly took his way; 
Then gain'd a rising ground, and call'd from far: 
"Resolve me, strangers, whence, and what you are; 
Your bus'ness here; and bring you peace or war?" 
High on the stern Aeneas his stand, 
And held a branch of olive in his hand, 
While thus he spoke: "The Phrygians' arms you see, 
Expell'd from Troy, provok'd in Italy 
By Latian foes, with war unjustly made; 
At first affianc'd, and at last betray'd. 
This message bear: 'The Trojans and their chief 
Bring holy peace, and beg the king's relief.' 
Struck with so great a name, and all on fire, 
The youth replies: "Whatever you require, 
Your fame exacts. Upon our shores descend. 
A welcome guest, and, what you wish, a friend." 
He said, and, downward hasting to the strand, 
Embrac'd the stranger prince, and join'd his hand. 
Conducted to the grove, Aeneas broke 
The silence first, and thus the king bespoke: 
"Best of the Greeks, to whom, by fate's command, 
I bear these peaceful branches in my hand, 
Undaunted I approach you, tho' I know 
Your birth is Grecian, and your land my foe; 
From Atreus tho' your ancient lineage came, 
And both the brother kings your kindred claim; 
Yet, my self-conscious worth, your high renown, 
Your virtue, thro' the neighb'ring nations blown, 
Our fathers' mingled blood, Apollo's voice, 
Have led me hither, less by need than choice. 
Our founder Dardanus, as fame has sung, 
And Greeks acknowledge, from Electra sprung: 
Electra from the loins of Atlas came; 
Atlas, whose head sustains the starry frame. 
Your sire is Mercury, whom long before 
On cold Cyllene's top fair Maia bore. 
Maia the fair, on fame if we rely, 
Was Atlas' daughter, who sustains the sky. 
Thus from one common source our streams divide; 
Ours is the Trojan, yours th' Areadian side. 
Rais'd by these hopes, I sent no news before, 
Nor ask'd your leave, nor did your faith implore; 
But come, without a pledge, my own ambassador. 
The same Rutulians, who with arms pursue 
The Trojan race, are equal foes to you. 
Our host expell'd, what farther force can stay 
The victor troops from universal sway? 
Then will they stretch their pow'r athwart the land, 
And either sea from side to side command. 
Receive our offer'd faith, and give us thine; 
Ours is a gen'rous and experienc'd line: 
We want not hearts nor bodies for the war; 
In council cautious, and in fields we dare." 
He said; and while spoke, with piercing eyes 
Evander view'd the man with vast surprise, 
Pleas'd with his action, ravish'd with his face: 
Then answer'd briefly, with a royal grace: 
"O valiant leader of the Trojan line, 
In whom the features of thy father shine, 
How I recall Anchises! how I see 
His motions, mien, and all my friend, in thee! 
Long tho' it be, 't is fresh within my mind, 
When Priam to his sister's court design'd 
A welcome visit, with a friendly stay, 
And thro' th' Arcadian kingdom took his way. 
Then, past a boy, the callow down began 
To shade my chin, and call me first a man. 
I saw the shining train with vast delight, 
And Priam's goodly person pleas'd my sight: 
But great Anchises, far above the rest, 
With awful wonder fir'd my youthful breast. 
I long'd to join in friendship's holy bands 
Our mutual hearts, and plight our mutual hands. 
I first accosted him: I sued, I sought, 
And, with a loving force, to Pheneus brought. 
He gave me, when at length constrain'd to go, 
A Lycian quiver and a Gnossian bow, 
A vest embroider'd, glorious to behold, 
And two rich bridles, with their bits of gold, 
Which my son's coursers in obedience hold. 
The league you ask, I offer, as your right; 
And, when to-morrow's sun reveals the light, 
With swift supplies you shall be sent away. 
Now celebrate with us this solemn day, 
Whose holy rites admit no long delay. 
Honor our annual feast; and take your seat, 
With friendly welcome, at a homely treat." 
Thus having said, the bowls (remov'd for fear) 
The youths replac'd, and soon restor'd the cheer. 
On sods of turf he set the soldiers round: 
A maple throne, rais'd higher from the ground, 
Receiv'd the Trojan chief; and, o'er the bed, 
A lion's shaggy hide for ornament they spread. 
The loaves were serv'd in canisters; the wine 
In bowls; the priest renew'd the rites divine: 
Broil'd entrails are their food, and beef's continued chine.

But when the rage of hunger was repress'd, 
Thus spoke Evander to his royal guest: 
"These rites, these altars, and this feast, O king, 
From no vain fears or superstition spring, 
Or blind devotion, or from blinder chance, 
Or heady zeal, or brutal ignorance; 
But, sav'd from danger, with a grateful sense, 
The labors of a god we recompense. 
See, from afar, yon rock that mates the sky, 
About whose feet such heaps of rubbish lie; 
Such indigested ruin; bleak and bare, 
How desart now it stands, expos'd in air! 
'T was once a robber's den, inclos'd around 
With living stone, and deep beneath the ground. 
The monster Cacus, more than half a beast, 
This hold, impervious to the sun, possess'd. 
The pavement ever foul with human gore; 
Heads, and their mangled members, hung the door. 
Vulcan this plague begot; and, like his sire, 
Black clouds he belch'd, and flakes of livid fire. 
Time, long expected, eas'd us of our load, 
And brought the needful presence of a god. 
Th' avenging force of Hercules, from Spain, 
Arriv'd in triumph, from Geryon slain: 
Thrice liv'd the giant, and thrice liv'd in vain. 
His prize, the lowing herds, Alcides drove 
Near Tiber's bank, to graze the shady grove. 
Allur'd with hope of plunder, and intent 
By force to rob, by fraud to circumvent, 
The brutal Cacus, as by chance they stray'd, 
Four oxen thence, and four fair kine convey'd; 
And, lest the printed footsteps might be seen, 
He dragg'd 'em backwards to his rocky den. 
The tracks averse a lying notice gave, 
And led the searcher backward from the cave. 
"Meantime the herdsman hero shifts his place, 
To find fresh pasture and untrodden grass. 
The beasts, who miss'd their mates, fill'd all around 
With bellowings, and the rocks restor'd the sound. 
One heifer, who had heard her love complain, 
Roar'd from the cave, and made the project vain. 
Alcides found the fraud; with rage he shook, 
And toss'd about his head his knotted oak. 
Swift as the winds, or Scythian arrows' flight, 
He clomb, with eager haste, th' aerial height. 
Then first we saw the monster mend his pace; 
Fear his eyes, and paleness in his face, 
Confess'd the god's approach. Trembling he springs, 
As terror had increas'd his feet with wings; 
Nor stay'd for stairs; but down the depth he threw 
His body, on his back the door he drew 
(The door, a rib of living rock; with pains 
His father hew'd it out, and bound with iron chains): 
He broke the heavy links, the mountain clos'd, 
And bars and levers to his foe oppos'd. 
The wretch had hardly made his dungeon fast; 
The fierce avenger came with bounding haste; 
Survey'd the mouth of the forbidden hold, 
And here and there his raging eyes he roll'd. 
He gnash'd his teeth; and thrice he compass'd round 
With winged speed the circuit of the ground. 
Thrice at the cavern's mouth he pull'd in vain, 
And, panting, thrice desisted from his pain. 
A pointed flinty rock, all bare and black, 
Grew gibbous from behind the mountain's back; 
Owls, ravens, all ill omens of the night, 
Here built their nests, and hither wing'd their flight. 
The leaning head hung threat'ning o'er the flood, 
And nodded to the left. The hero stood 
Adverse, with planted feet, and, from the right, 
Tugg'd at the solid stone with all his might. 
Thus heav'd, the fix'd foundations of the rock 
Gave way; heav'n echo'd at the rattling shock. 
Tumbling, it chok'd the flood: on either side 
The banks leap backward, and the streams divide; 
The sky shrunk upward with unusual dread, 
And trembling Tiber div'd beneath his bed. 
The court of Cacus stands reveal'd to sight; 
The cavern glares with new-admitted light. 
So the pent vapors, with a rumbling sound, 
Heave from below, and rend the hollow ground; 
A sounding flaw succeeds; and, from on high, 
The gods with hate beheld the nether sky: 
The ghosts repine at violated night, 
And curse th' invading sun, and sicken at the sight. 
The graceless monster, caught in open day, 
Inclos'd, and in despair to fly away, 
Howls horrible from underneath, and fills 
His hollow palace with unmanly yells. 
The hero stands above, and from afar 
Plies him with darts, and stones, and distant war. 
He, from his nostrils huge mouth, expires 
Black clouds of smoke, amidst his father's fires, 
Gath'ring, with each repeated blast, the night, 
To make uncertain aim, and erring sight. 
The wrathful god then plunges from above, 
And, where in thickest waves the sparkles drove, 
There lights; and wades thro' fumes, and gropes his way,

Half sing'd, half stifled, till he grasps his prey. 
The monster, spewing fruitless flames, he found; 
He squeez'd his throat; he writh'd his neck around, 
And in a knot his crippled members bound; 
Then from their sockets tore his burning eyes: 
Roll'd on a heap, the breathless robber lies. 
The doors, unbarr'd, receive the rushing day, 
And thoro' lights disclose the ravish'd prey. 
The bulls, redeem'd, breathe open air again. 
Next, by the feet, they drag him from his den. 
The wond'ring neighborhood, with glad surprise, 
Behold his shagged breast, his giant size, 
His mouth that flames no more, and his extinguish'd eyes.

From that auspicious day, with rites divine, 
We worship at the hero's holy shrine. 
Potitius first ordain'd these annual vows: 
As priests, were added the Pinarian house, 
Who rais'd this altar in the sacred shade, 
Where honors, ever due, for ever shall be paid. 
For these deserts, and this high virtue shown, 
Ye warlike youths, your heads with garlands crown: 
Fill high the goblets with a sparkling flood, 
And with deep draughts invoke our common god." 
This said, a double wreath Evander twin'd, 
And poplars black and white his temples bind. 
Then brims his ample bowl. With like design 
The rest invoke the gods, with sprinkled wine. 
Meantime the sun descended from the skies, 
And the bright evening star began to rise. 
And now the priests, Potitius at their head, 
In skins of beasts involv'd, the long procession led; 
Held high the flaming tapers in their hands, 
As custom had prescrib'd their holy bands; 
Then with a second course the tables load, 
And with full chargers offer to the god. 
The Salii sing, and cense his altars round 
With Saban smoke, their heads with poplar bound- 
One choir of old, another of the young, 
To dance, and bear the burthen of the song. 
The lay records the labors, and the praise, 
And all th' immortal acts of Hercules: 
First, how the mighty babe, when swath'd in bands, 
The serpents strangled with his infant hands; 
Then, as in years and matchless force he grew, 
Th' Oechalian walls, and Trojan, overthrew. 
Besides, a thousand hazards they relate, 
Procur'd by Juno's and Eurystheus' hate: 
"Thy hands, unconquer'd hero, could subdue 
The cloud-born Centaurs, and the monster crew: 
Nor thy resistless arm the bull withstood, 
Nor he, the roaring terror of the wood. 
The triple porter of the Stygian seat, 
With lolling tongue, lay fawning at thy feet, 
And, seiz'd with fear, forgot his mangled meat. 
Th' infernal waters trembled at thy sight; 
Thee, god, no face of danger could affright; 
Not huge Typhoeus, nor th' unnumber'd snake, 
Increas'd with hissing heads, in Lerna's lake. 
Hail, Jove's undoubted son! an added grace 
To heav'n and the great author of thy race! 
Receive the grateful off'rings which we pay, 
And smile propitious on thy solemn day!" 
In numbers thus they sung; above the rest, 
The den and death of Cacus crown the feast. 
The woods to hollow vales convey the sound, 
The vales to hills, and hills the notes rebound. 
The rites perform'd, the cheerful train retire. 
Betwixt young Pallas and his aged sire, 
The Trojan pass'd, the city to survey, 
And pleasing talk beguil'd the tedious way. 
The stranger cast around his curious eyes, 
New objects viewing still, with new surprise; 
With greedy joy enquires of various things, 
And acts and monuments of ancient kings. 
Then thus the founder of the Roman tow'rs: 
"These woods were first the seat of sylvan pow'rs, 
Of Nymphs and Fauns, and salvage men, who took 
Their birth from trunks of trees and stubborn oak. 
Nor laws they knew, nor manners, nor the care 
Of lab'ring oxen, or the shining share, 
Nor arts of gain, nor what they gain'd to spare. 
Their exercise the chase; the running flood 
Supplied their thirst, the trees supplied their food. 
Then Saturn came, who fled the pow'r of Jove, 
Robb'd of his realms, and banish'd from above. 
The men, dispers'd on hills, to towns he brought, 
And laws ordain'd, and civil customs taught, 
And Latium call'd the land where safe he lay 
From his unduteous son, and his usurping sway. 
With his mild empire, peace and plenty came; 
And hence the golden times deriv'd their name. 
A more degenerate and discolor'd age 
Succeeded this, with avarice and rage. 
Th' Ausonians then, and bold Sicanians came; 
And Saturn's empire often chang'd the name. 
Then kings, gigantic Tybris, and the rest, 
With arbitrary sway the land oppress'd: 
For Tiber's flood was Albula before, 
Till, from the tyrant's fate, his name it bore. 
I last arriv'd, driv'n from my native home 
By fortune's pow'r, and fate's resistless doom. 
Long toss'd on seas, I sought this happy land, 
Warn'd by my mother nymph, and call'd by Heav'n's command."

Thus, walking on, he spoke, and shew'd the gate, 
Since call'd Carmental by the Roman state; 
Where stood an altar, sacred to the name 
Of old Carmenta, the prophetic dame, 
Who to her son foretold th' Aenean race, 
Sublime in fame, and Rome's imperial place: 
Then shews the forest, which, in after times, 
Fierce Romulus for perpetrated crimes 
A sacred refuge made; with this, the shrine 
Where Pan below the rock had rites divine: 
Then tells of Argus' death, his murder'd guest, 
Whose grave and tomb his innocence attest. 
Thence, to the steep Tarpeian rock he leads; 
Now roof'd with gold, then thatch'd with homely reeds. 
A reverent fear (such superstition reigns 
Among the rude) ev'n then possess'd the swains. 
Some god, they knew- what god, they could not tell- 
Did there amidst the sacred horror dwell. 
Th' Arcadians thought him Jove; and said they saw 
The mighty Thund'rer with majestic awe, 
Who took his shield, and dealt his bolts around, 
And scatter'd tempests on the teeming ground. 
Then saw two heaps of ruins, (once they stood 
Two stately towns, on either side the flood,) 
Saturnia's and Janicula's remains; 
And either place the founder's name retains. 
Discoursing thus together, they resort 
Where poor Evander kept his country court. 
They view'd the ground of Rome's litigious hall; 
(Once oxen low'd, where now the lawyers bawl;) 
Then, stooping, thro' the narrow gate they press'd, 
When thus the king bespoke his Trojan guest: 
"Mean as it is, this palace, and this door, 
Receiv'd Alcides, then a conqueror. 
Dare to be poor; accept our homely food, 
Which feasted him, and emulate a god." 
Then underneath a lowly roof he led 
The weary prince, and laid him on a bed; 
The stuffing leaves, with hides of bears o'erspread. 
Now Night had shed her silver dews around, 
And with her sable wings embrac'd the ground, 
When love's fair goddess, anxious for her son, 
(New tumults rising, and new wars begun,) 
Couch'd with her husband in his golden bed, 
With these alluring words invokes his aid; 
And, that her pleasing speech his mind may move, 
Inspires each accent with the charms of love: 
"While cruel fate conspir'd with Grecian pow'rs, 
To level with the ground the Trojan tow'rs, 
I ask'd not aid th' unhappy to restore, 
Nor did the succor of thy skill implore; 
Nor urg'd the labors of my lord in vain, 
A sinking empire longer to sustain, 
Tho'much I ow'd to Priam's house, and more 
The dangers of Aeneas did deplore. 
But now, by Jove's command, and fate's decree, 
His race is doom'd to reign in Italy: 
With humble suit I beg thy needful art, 
O still propitious pow'r, that rules my heart! 
A mother kneels a suppliant for her son. 
By Thetis and Aurora thou wert won 
To forge impenetrable shields, and grace 
With fated arms a less illustrious race. 
Behold, what haughty nations are combin'd 
Against the relics of the Phrygian kind, 
With fire and sword my people to destroy, 
And conquer Venus twice, in conqu'ring Troy." 
She said; and straight her arms, of snowy hue, 
About her unresolving husband threw. 
Her soft embraces soon infuse desire; 
His bones and marrow sudden warmth inspire; 
And all the godhead feels the wonted fire. 
Not half so swift the rattling thunder flies, 
Or forky lightnings flash along the skies. 
The goddess, proud of her successful wiles, 
And conscious of her form, in secret smiles. 
Then thus the pow'r, obnoxious to her charms, 
Panting, and half dissolving in her arms: 
"Why seek you reasons for a cause so just, 
Or your own beauties or my love distrust? 
Long since, had you requir'd my helpful hand, 
Th' artificer and art you might command, 
To labor arms for Troy: nor Jove, nor fate, 
Confin'd their empire to so short a date. 
And, if you now desire new wars to wage, 
My skill I promise, and my pains engage. 
Whatever melting metals can conspire, 
Or breathing bellows, or the forming fire, 
Is freely yours: your anxious fears remove, 
And think no task is difficult to love." 
Trembling he spoke; and, eager of her charms, 
He snatch'd the willing goddess to his arms; 
Till in her lap infus'd, he lay possess'd 
Of full desire, and sunk to pleasing rest. 
Now when the Night her middle race had rode, 
And his first slumber had refresh'd the god- 
The time when early housewives leave the bed; 
When living embers on the hearth they spread, 
Supply the lamp, and call the maids to rise- 
With yawning mouths, and with half-open'd eyes, 
They ply the distaff by the winking light, 
And to their daily labor add the night: 
Thus frugally they earn their children's bread, 
And uncorrupted keep the nuptial bed- 
Not less concern'd, nor at a later hour, 
Rose from his downy couch the forging pow'r. 
Sacred to Vulcan's name, an isle there lay, 
Betwixt Sicilia's coasts and Lipare, 
Rais'd high on smoking rocks; and, deep below, 
In hollow caves the fires of Aetna glow. 
The Cyclops here their heavy hammers deal; 
Loud strokes, and hissings of tormented steel, 
Are heard around; the boiling waters roar, 
And smoky flames thro' fuming tunnels soar. 
Hether the Father of the Fire, by night, 
Thro' the brown air precipitates his flight. 
On their eternal anvils here he found 
The brethren beating, and the blows go round. 
A load of pointless thunder now there lies 
Before their hands, to ripen for the skies: 
These darts, for angry Jove, they daily cast; 
Consum'd on mortals with prodigious waste. 
Three rays of writhen rain, of fire three more, 
Of winged southern winds and cloudy store 
As many parts, the dreadful mixture frame; 
And fears are added, and avenging flame. 
Inferior ministers, for Mars, repair 
His broken axletrees and blunted war, 
And send him forth again with furbish'd arms, 
To wake the lazy war with trumpets' loud alarms. 
The rest refresh the scaly snakes that fold 
The shield of Pallas, and renew their gold. 
Full on the crest the Gorgon's head they place, 
With eyes that roll in death, and with distorted face. 
"My sons," said Vulcan, "set your tasks aside; 
Your strength and master-skill must now be tried. 
Arms for a hero forge; arms that require 
Your force, your speed, and all your forming fire." 
He said. They set their former work aside, 
And their new toils with eager haste divide. 
A flood of molten silver, brass, and gold, 
And deadly steel, in the large furnace roll'd; 
Of this, their artful hands a shield prepare, 
Alone sufficient to sustain the war. 
Sev'n orbs within a spacious round they close: 
One stirs the fire, and one the bellows blows. 
The hissing steel is in the smithy drown'd; 
The grot with beaten anvils groans around. 
By turns their arms advance, in equal time; 
By turns their hands descend, and hammers chime. 
They turn the glowing mass with crooked tongs; 
The fiery work proceeds, with rustic songs. 
While, at the Lemnian god's command, they urge 
Their labors thus, and ply th' Aeolian forge, 
The cheerful morn salutes Evander's eyes, 
And songs of chirping birds invite to rise. 
He leaves his lowly bed: his buskins meet 
Above his ankles; sandals sheathe his feet: 
He sets his trusty sword upon his side, 
And o'er his shoulder throws a panther's hide. 
Two menial dogs before their master press'd. 
Thus clad, and guarded thus, he seeks his kingly guest. 
Mindful of promis'd aid, he mends his pace, 
But meets Aeneas in the middle space. 
Young Pallas did his father's steps attend, 
And true Achates waited on his friend. 
They join their hands; a secret seat they choose; 
Th' Arcadian first their former talk renews: 
"Undaunted prince, I never can believe 
The Trojan empire lost, while you survive. 
Command th' assistance of a faithful friend; 
But feeble are the succors I can send. 
Our narrow kingdom here the Tiber bounds; 
That other side the Latian state surrounds, 
Insults our walls, and wastes our fruitful grounds. 
But mighty nations I prepare, to join 
Their arms with yours, and aid your just design. 
You come, as by your better genius sent, 
And fortune seems to favor your intent. 
Not far from hence there stands a hilly town, 
Of ancient building, and of high renown, 
Torn from the Tuscans by the Lydian race, 
Who gave the name of Caere to the place, 
Once Agyllina call'd. It flourish'd long, 
In pride of wealth and warlike people strong, 
Till curs'd Mezentius, in a fatal hour, 
Assum'd the crown, with arbitrary pow'r. 
What words can paint those execrable times, 
The subjects' suff'rings, and the tyrant's crimes! 
That blood, those murthers, O ye gods, replace 
On his own head, and on his impious race! 
The living and the dead at his command 
Were coupled, face to face, and hand to hand, 
Till, chok'd with stench, in loath'd embraces tied, 
The ling'ring wretches pin'd away and died. 
Thus plung'd in ills, and meditating more- 
The people's patience, tir'd, no longer bore 
The raging monster; but with arms beset 
His house, and vengeance and destruction threat. 
They fire his palace: while the flame ascends, 
They force his guards, and execute his friends. 
He cleaves the crowd, and, favor'd by the night, 
To Turnus' friendly court directs his flight. 
By just revenge the Tuscans set on fire, 
With arms, their king to punishment require: 
Their num'rous troops, now muster'd on the strand, 
My counsel shall submit to your command. 
Their navy swarms upon the coasts; they cry 
To hoist their anchors, but the gods deny. 
An ancient augur, skill'd in future fate, 
With these foreboding words restrains their hate: 
'Ye brave in arms, ye Lydian blood, the flow'r 
Of Tuscan youth, and choice of all their pow'r, 
Whom just revenge against Mezentius arms, 
To seek your tyrant's death by lawful arms; 
Know this: no native of our land may lead 
This pow'rful people; seek a foreign head.' 
Aw'd with these words, in camps they still abide, 
And wait with longing looks their promis'd guide. 
Tarchon, the Tuscan chief, to me has sent 
Their crown, and ev'ry regal ornament: 
The people join their own with his desire; 
And all my conduct, as their king, require. 
But the chill blood that creeps within my veins, 
And age, and listless limbs unfit for pains, 
And a soul conscious of its own decay, 
Have forc'd me to refuse imperial sway. 
My Pallas were more fit to mount the throne, 
And should, but he's a Sabine mother's son, 
And half a native; but, in you, combine 
A manly vigor, and a foreign line. 
Where Fate and smiling Fortune shew the way, 
Pursue the ready path to sov'reign sway. 
The staff of my declining days, my son, 
Shall make your good or ill success his own; 
In fighting fields from you shall learn to dare, 
And serve the hard apprenticeship of war; 
Your matchless courage and your conduct view, 
And early shall begin t' admire and copy you. 
Besides, two hundred horse he shall command; 
Tho' few, a warlike and well-chosen band. 
These in my name are listed; and my son 
As many more has added in his own." 
Scarce had he said; Achates and his guest, 
With downcast eyes, their silent grief express'd; 
Who, short of succors, and in deep despair, 
Shook at the dismal prospect of the war. 
But his bright mother, from a breaking cloud, 
To cheer her issue, thunder'd thrice aloud; 
Thrice forky lightning flash'd along the sky, 
And Tyrrhene trumpets thrice were heard on high. 
Then, gazing up, repeated peals they hear; 
And, in a heav'n serene, refulgent arms appear: 
Redd'ning the skies, and glitt'ring all around, 
The temper'd metals clash, and yield a silver sound. 
The rest stood trembling, struck with awe divine; 
Aeneas only, conscious to the sign, 
Presag'd th' event, and joyful view'd, above, 
Th' accomplish'd promise of the Queen of Love. 
Then, to th' Arcadian king: "This prodigy 
(Dismiss your fear) belongs alone to me. 
Heav'n calls me to the war: th' expected sign 
Is giv'n of promis'd aid, and arms divine. 
My goddess mother, whose indulgent care 
Foresaw the dangers of the growing war, 
This omen gave, when bright Vulcanian arms, 
Fated from force of steel by Stygian charms, 
Suspended, shone on high: she then foreshow'd 
Approaching fights, and fields to float in blood. 
Turnus shall dearly pay for faith forsworn; 
And corps, and swords, and shields, on Tiber borne, 
Shall choke his flood: now sound the loud alarms; 
And, Latian troops, prepare your perjur'd arms." 
He said, and, rising from his homely throne, 
The solemn rites of Hercules begun, 
And on his altars wak'd the sleeping fires; 
Then cheerful to his household gods retires; 
There offers chosen sheep. Th' Arcadian king 
And Trojan youth the same oblations bring. 
Next, of his men and ships he makes review; 
Draws out the best and ablest of the crew. 
Down with the falling stream the refuse run, 
To raise with joyful news his drooping son. 
Steeds are prepar'd to mount the Trojan band, 
Who wait their leader to the Tyrrhene land. 
A sprightly courser, fairer than the rest, 
The king himself presents his royal guest: 
A lion's hide his back and limbs infold, 
Precious with studded work, and paws of gold. 
Fame thro' the little city spreads aloud 
Th' intended march, amid the fearful crowd: 
The matrons beat their breasts, dissolve in tears, 
And double their devotion in their fears. 
The war at hand appears with more affright, 
And rises ev'ry moment to the sight. 
Then old Evander, with a close embrace, 
Strain'd his departing friend; and tears o'erflow his face.

"Would Heav'n," said he, "my strength and youth recall, 
Such as I was beneath Praeneste's wall; 
Then when I made the foremost foes retire, 
And set whole heaps of conquer'd shields on fire; 
When Herilus in single fight I slew, 
Whom with three lives Feronia did endue; 
And thrice I sent him to the Stygian shore, 
Till the last ebbing soul return'd no more- 
Such if I stood renew'd, not these alarms, 
Nor death, should rend me from my Pallas' arms; 
Nor proud Mezentius, thus unpunish'd, boast 
His rapes and murthers on the Tuscan coast. 
Ye gods, and mighty Jove, in pity bring 
Relief, and hear a father and a king! 
If fate and you reserve these eyes, to see 
My son return with peace and victory; 
If the lov'd boy shall bless his father's sight; 
If we shall meet again with more delight; 
Then draw my life in length; let me sustain, 
In hopes of his embrace, the worst of pain. 
But if your hard decrees- which, O! I dread- 
Have doom'd to death his undeserving head; 
This, O this very moment, let me die! 
While hopes and fears in equal balance lie; 
While, yet possess'd of all his youthful charms, 
I strain him close within these aged arms; 
Before that fatal news my soul shall wound!" 
He said, and, swooning, sunk upon the ground. 
His servants bore him off, and softly laid 
His languish'd limbs upon his homely bed. 
The horsemen march; the gates are open'd wide; 
Aeneas at their head, Achates by his side. 
Next these, the Trojan leaders rode along; 
Last follows in the rear th' Arcadian throng. 
Young Pallas shone conspicuous o'er the rest; 
Gilded his arms, embroider'd was his vest. 
So, from the seas, exerts his radiant head 
The star by whom the lights of heav'n are led; 
Shakes from his rosy locks the pearly dews, 
Dispels the darkness, and the day renews. 
The trembling wives the walls and turrets crowd, 
And follow, with their eyes, the dusty cloud, 
Which winds disperse by fits, and shew from far 
The blaze of arms, and shields, and shining war. 
The troops, drawn up in beautiful array, 
O'er heathy plains pursue the ready way. 
Repeated peals of shouts are heard around; 
The neighing coursers answer to the sound, 
And shake with horny hoofs the solid ground. 
A greenwood shade, for long religion known, 
Stands by the streams that wash the Tuscan town, 
Incompass'd round with gloomy hills above, 
Which add a holy horror to the grove. 
The first inhabitants of Grecian blood, 
That sacred forest to Silvanus vow'd, 
The guardian of their flocks and fields; and pay 
Their due devotions on his annual day. 
Not far from hence, along the river's side, 
In tents secure, the Tuscan troops abide, 
By Tarchon led. Now, from a rising ground, 
Aeneas cast his wond'ring eyes around, 
And all the Tyrrhene army had in sight, 
Stretch'd on the spacious plain from left to right. 
Thether his warlike train the Trojan led, 
Refresh'd his men, and wearied horses fed. 
Meantime the mother goddess, crown'd with charms, 
Breaks thro' the clouds, and brings the fated arms. 
Within a winding vale she finds her son, 
On the cool river's banks, retir'd alone. 
She shews her heav'nly form without disguise, 
And gives herself to his desiring eyes. 
"Behold," she said, "perform'd in ev'ry part, 
My promise made, and Vulcan's labor'd art. 
Now seek, secure, the Latian enemy, 
And haughty Turnus to the field defy." 
She said; and, having first her son embrac'd, 
The radiant arms beneath an oak she plac'd, 
Proud of the gift, he roll'd his greedy sight 
Around the work, and gaz'd with vast delight. 
He lifts, he turns, he poises, and admires 
The crested helm, that vomits radiant fires: 
His hands the fatal sword and corslet hold, 
One keen with temper'd steel, one stiff with gold: 
Both ample, flaming both, and beamy bright; 
So shines a cloud, when edg'd with adverse light. 
He shakes the pointed spear, and longs to try 
The plated cuishes on his manly thigh; 
But most admires the shield's mysterious mold, 
And Roman triumphs rising on the gold: 
For these, emboss'd, the heav'nly smith had wrought 
(Not in the rolls of future fate untaught) 
The wars in order, and the race divine 
Of warriors issuing from the Julian line. 
The cave of Mars was dress'd with mossy greens: 
There, by the wolf, were laid the martial twins. 
Intrepid on her swelling dugs they hung; 
The foster dam loll'd out her fawning tongue: 
They suck'd secure, while, bending back her head, 
She lick'd their tender limbs, and form'd them as they fed.

Not far from thence new Rome appears, with games 
Projected for the rape of Sabine dames. 
The pit resounds with shrieks; a war succeeds, 
For breach of public faith, and unexampled deeds. 
Here for revenge the Sabine troops contend; 
The Romans there with arms the prey defend. 
Wearied with tedious war, at length they cease; 
And both the kings and kingdoms plight the peace. 
The friendly chiefs before Jove's altar stand, 
Both arm'd, with each a charger in his hand: 
A fatted sow for sacrifice is led, 
With imprecations on the perjur'd head. 
Near this, the traitor Metius, stretch'd between 
Four fiery steeds, is dragg'd along the green, 
By Tullus' doom: the brambles drink his blood, 
And his torn limbs are left the vulture's food. 
There, Porsena to Rome proud Tarquin brings, 
And would by force restore the banish'd kings. 
One tyrant for his fellow-tyrant fights; 
The Roman youth assert their native rights. 
Before the town the Tuscan army lies, 
To win by famine, or by fraud surprise. 
Their king, half-threat'ning, half-disdaining stood, 
While Cocles broke the bridge, and stemm'd the flood. 
The captive maids there tempt the raging tide, 
Scap'd from their chains, with Cloelia for their guide. 
High on a rock heroic Manlius stood, 
To guard the temple, and the temple's god. 
Then Rome was poor; and there you might behold 
The palace thatch'd with straw, now roof'd with gold. 
The silver goose before the shining gate 
There flew, and, by her cackle, sav'd the state. 
She told the Gauls' approach; th' approaching Gauls, 
Obscure in night, ascend, and seize the walls. 
The gold dissembled well their yellow hair, 
And golden chains on their white necks they wear. 
Gold are their vests; long Alpine spears they wield, 
And their left arm sustains a length of shield. 
Hard by, the leaping Salian priests advance; 
And naked thro' the streets the mad Luperci dance, 
In caps of wool; the targets dropp'd from heav'n. 
Here modest matrons, in soft litters driv'n, 
To pay their vows in solemn pomp appear, 
And odorous gums in their chaste hands they bear. 
Far hence remov'd, the Stygian seats are seen; 
Pains of the damn'd, and punish'd Catiline 
Hung on a rock- the traitor; and, around, 
The Furies hissing from the nether ground. 
Apart from these, the happy souls he draws, 
And Cato's holy ghost dispensing laws. 
Betwixt the quarters flows a golden sea; 
But foaming surges there in silver play. 
The dancing dolphins with their tails divide 
The glitt'ring waves, and cut the precious tide. 
Amid the main, two mighty fleets engage 
Their brazen beaks, oppos'd with equal rage. 
Actium surveys the well-disputed prize; 
Leucate's wat'ry plain with foamy billows fries. 
Young Caesar, on the stern, in armor bright, 
Here leads the Romans and their gods to fight: 
His beamy temples shoot their flames afar, 
And o'er his head is hung the Julian star. 
Agrippa seconds him, with prosp'rous gales, 
And, with propitious gods, his foes assails: 
A naval crown, that binds his manly brows, 
The happy fortune of the fight foreshows. 
Rang'd on the line oppos'd, Antonius brings 
Barbarian aids, and troops of Eastern kings; 
Th' Arabians near, and Bactrians from afar, 
Of tongues discordant, and a mingled war: 
And, rich in gaudy robes, amidst the strife, 
His ill fate follows him- th' Egyptian wife. 
Moving they fight; with oars and forky prows 
The froth is gather'd, and the water glows. 
It seems, as if the Cyclades again 
Were rooted up, and justled in the main; 
Or floating mountains floating mountains meet; 
Such is the fierce encounter of the fleet. 
Fireballs are thrown, and pointed jav'lins fly; 
The fields of Neptune take a purple dye. 
The queen herself, amidst the loud alarms, 
With cymbals toss'd her fainting soldiers warms- 
Fool as she was! who had not yet divin'd 
Her cruel fate, nor saw the snakes behind. 
Her country gods, the monsters of the sky, 
Great Neptune, Pallas, and Love's Queen defy: 
The dog Anubis barks, but barks in vain, 
Nor longer dares oppose th' ethereal train. 
Mars in the middle of the shining shield 
Is grav'd, and strides along the liquid field. 
The Dirae souse from heav'n with swift descent; 
And Discord, dyed in blood, with garments rent, 
Divides the prease: her steps Bellona treads, 
And shakes her iron rod above their heads. 
This seen, Apollo, from his Actian height, 
Pours down his arrows; at whose winged flight 
The trembling Indians and Egyptians yield, 
And soft Sabaeans quit the wat'ry field. 
The fatal mistress hoists her silken sails, 
And, shrinking from the fight, invokes the gales. 
Aghast she looks, and heaves her breast for breath, 
Panting, and pale with fear of future death. 
The god had figur'd her as driv'n along 
By winds and waves, and scudding thro' the throng. 
Just opposite, sad Nilus opens wide 
His arms and ample bosom to the tide, 
And spreads his mantle o'er the winding coast, 
In which he wraps his queen, and hides the flying host. 
The victor to the gods his thanks express'd, 
And Rome, triumphant, with his presence bless'd. 
Three hundred temples in the town he plac'd; 
With spoils and altars ev'ry temple grac'd. 
Three shining nights, and three succeeding days, 
The fields resound with shouts, the streets with praise,

The domes with songs, the theaters with plays. 
All altars flame: before each altar lies, 
Drench'd in his gore, the destin'd sacrifice. 
Great Caesar sits sublime upon his throne, 
Before Apollo's porch of Parian stone; 
Accepts the presents vow'd for victory, 
And hangs the monumental crowns on high. 
Vast crowds of vanquish'd nations march along, 
Various in arms, in habit, and in tongue. 
Here, Mulciber assigns the proper place 
For Carians, and th' ungirt Numidian race; 
Then ranks the Thracians in the second row, 
With Scythians, expert in the dart and bow. 
And here the tam'd Euphrates humbly glides, 
And there the Rhine submits her swelling tides, 
And proud Araxes, whom no bridge could bind; 
The Danes' unconquer'd offspring march behind, 
And Morini, the last of humankind. 
These figures, on the shield divinely wrought, 
By Vulcan labor'd, and by Venus brought, 
With joy and wonder fill the hero's thought. 
Unknown the names, he yet admires the grace, 
And bears aloft the fame and fortune of his race. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IX

While these affairs in distant places pass'd, 
The various Iris Juno sends with haste, 
To find bold Turnus, who, with anxious thought, 
The secret shade of his great grandsire sought. 
Retir'd alone she found the daring man, 
And op'd her rosy lips, and thus began: 
"What none of all the gods could grant thy vows, 
That, Turnus, this auspicious day bestows. 
Aeneas, gone to seek th' Arcadian prince, 
Has left the Trojan camp without defense; 
And, short of succors there, employs his pains 
In parts remote to raise the Tuscan swains. 
Now snatch an hour that favors thy designs; 
Unite thy forces, and attack their lines." 
This said, on equal wings she pois'd her weight, 
And form'd a radiant rainbow in her flight. 
The Daunian hero lifts his hands eyes, 
And thus invokes the goddess as she flies: 
"Iris, the grace of heav'n, what pow'r divine 
Has sent thee down, thro' dusky clouds to shine? 
See, they divide; immortal day appears, 
And glitt'ring planets dancing in their spheres! 
With joy, these happy omens I obey, 
And follow to the war the god that leads the way." 
Thus having said, as by the brook he stood, 
He scoop'd the water from the crystal flood; 
Then with his hands the drops to heav'n he throws, 
And loads the pow'rs above with offer'd vows. 
Now march the bold confed'rates thro' the plain, 
Well hors'd, well clad; a rich and shining train. 
Messapus leads the van; and, in the rear, 
The sons of Tyrrheus in bright arms appear. 
In the main battle, with his flaming crest, 
The mighty Turnus tow'rs above the rest. 
Silent they move, majestically slow, 
Like ebbing Nile, or Ganges in his flow. 
The Trojans view the dusty cloud from far, 
And the dark menace of the distant war. 
Caicus from the rampire saw it rise, 
Black'ning the fields, and thick'ning thro' the skies. 
Then to his fellows thus aloud he calls: 
"What rolling clouds, my friends, approach the walls? 
Arm! arm! and man the works! prepare your spears 
And pointed darts! the Latian host appears." 
Thus warn'd, they shut their gates; with shouts ascend 
The bulwarks, and, secure, their foes attend: 
For their wise gen'ral, with foreseeing care, 
Had charg'd them not to tempt the doubtful war, 
Nor, tho' provok'd, in open fields advance, 
But close within their lines attend their chance. 
Unwilling, yet they keep the strict command, 
And sourly wait in arms the hostile band. 
The fiery Turnus flew before the rest: 
A piebald steed of Thracian strain he press'd; 
His helm of massy gold, and crimson was his crest. 
With twenty horse to second his designs, 
An unexpected foe, he fac'd the lines. 
"Is there," he said, "in arms, who bravely dare 
His leader's honor and his danger share?" 
Then spurring on, his brandish'd dart he threw, 
In sign of war: applauding shouts ensue. 
Amaz'd to find a dastard race, that run 
Behind the rampires and the battle shun, 
He rides around the camp, with rolling eyes, 
And stops at ev'ry post, and ev'ry passage tries. 
So roams the nightly wolf about the fold: 
Wet with descending show'rs, and stiff with cold, 
He howls for hunger, and he grins for pain, 
(His gnashing teeth are exercis'd in vain,) 
And, impotent of anger, finds no way 
In his distended paws to grasp the prey. 
The mothers listen; but the bleating lambs 
Securely swig the dug, beneath the dams. 
Thus ranges eager Turnus o'er the plain. 
Sharp with desire, and furious with disdain; 
Surveys each passage with a piercing sight, 
To force his foes in equal field to fight. 
Thus while he gazes round, at length he spies, 
Where, fenc'd with strong redoubts, their navy lies, 
Close underneath the walls; the washing tide 
Secures from all approach this weaker side. 
He takes the wish'd occasion, fills his hand 
With ready fires, and shakes a flaming brand. 
Urg'd by his presence, ev'ry soul is warm'd, 
And ev'ry hand with kindled firs is arm'd. 
From the fir'd pines the scatt'ring sparkles fly; 
Fat vapors, mix'd with flames, involve the sky. 
What pow'r, O Muses, could avert the flame 
Which threaten'd, in the fleet, the Trojan name? 
Tell: for the fact, thro' length of time obscure, 
Is hard to faith; yet shall the fame endure. 
'T is said that, when the chief prepar'd his flight, 
And fell'd his timber from Mount Ida's height, 
The grandam goddess then approach'd her son, 
And with a mother's majesty begun: 
"Grant me," she said, "the sole request I bring, 
Since conquer'd heav'n has own'd you for its king. 
On Ida's brows, for ages past, there stood, 
With firs and maples fill'd, a shady wood; 
And on the summit rose a sacred grove, 
Where I was worship'd with religious love. 
Those woods, that holy grove, my long delight, 
I gave the Trojan prince, to speed his flight. 
Now, fill'd with fear, on their behalf I come; 
Let neither winds o'erset, nor waves intomb 
The floating forests of the sacred pine; 
But let it be their safety to be mine." 
Then thus replied her awful son, who rolls 
The radiant stars, and heav'n and earth controls: 
"How dare you, mother, endless date demand 
For vessels molded by a mortal hand? 
What then is fate? Shall bold Aeneas ride, 
Of safety certain, on th' uncertain tide? 
Yet, what I can, I grant; when, wafted o'er, 
The chief is landed on the Latian shore, 
Whatever ships escape the raging storms, 
At my command shall change their fading forms 
To nymphs divine, and plow the wat'ry way, 
Like Dotis and the daughters of the sea." 
To seal his sacred vow, by Styx he swore, 
The lake of liquid pitch, the dreary shore, 
And Phlegethon's innavigable flood, 
And the black regions of his brother god. 
He said; and shook the skies with his imperial nod. 
And now at length the number'd hours were come, 
Prefix'd by fate's irrevocable doom, 
When the great Mother of the Gods was free 
To save her ships, and finish Jove's decree. 
First, from the quarter of the morn, there sprung 
A light that sign'd the heav'ns, and shot along; 
Then from a cloud, fring'd round with golden fires, 
Were timbrels heard, and Berecynthian choirs; 
And, last, a voice, with more than mortal sounds, 
Both hosts, in arms oppos'd, with equal horror wounds: 
"O Trojan race, your needless aid forbear, 
And know, my ships are my peculiar care. 
With greater ease the bold Rutulian may, 
With hissing brands, attempt to burn the sea, 
Than singe my sacred pines. But you, my charge, 
Loos'd from your crooked anchors, launch at large, 
Exalted each a nymph: forsake the sand, 
And swim the seas, at Cybele's command." 
No sooner had the goddess ceas'd to speak, 
When, lo! th' obedient ships their haulsers break; 
And, strange to tell, like dolphins, in the main 
They plunge their prows, and dive, and spring again: 
As many beauteous maids the billows sweep, 
As rode before tall vessels on the deep. 
The foes, surpris'd with wonder, stood aghast; 
Messapus curb'd his fiery courser's haste; 
Old Tiber roar'd, and, raising up his head, 
Call'd back his waters to their oozy bed. 
Turnus alone, undaunted, bore the shock, 
And with these words his trembling troops bespoke: 
"These monsters for the Trojans' fate are meant, 
And are by Jove for black presages sent. 
He takes the cowards' last relief away; 
For fly they cannot, and, constrain'd to stay, 
Must yield unfought, a base inglorious prey. 
The liquid half of all the globe is lost; 
Heav'n shuts the seas, and we secure the coast. 
Theirs is no more than that small spot of ground 
Which myriads of our martial men surround. 
Their fates I fear not, or vain oracles. 
'T was giv'n to Venus they should cross the seas, 
And land secure upon the Latian plains: 
Their promis'd hour is pass'd, and mine remains. 
'T is in the fate of Turnus to destroy, 
With sword and fire, the faithless race of Troy. 
Shall such affronts as these alone inflame 
The Grecian brothers, and the Grecian name? 
My cause and theirs is one; a fatal strife, 
And final ruin, for a ravish'd wife. 
Was 't not enough, that, punish'd for the crime, 
They fell; but will they fall a second time? 
One would have thought they paid enough before, 
To curse the costly sex, and durst offend no more. 
Can they securely trust their feeble wall, 
A slight partition, a thin interval, 
Betwixt their fate and them; when Troy, tho' built 
By hands divine, yet perish'd by their guilt? 
Lend me, for once, my friends, your valiant hands, 
To force from out their lines these dastard bands. 
Less than a thousand ships will end this war, 
Nor Vulcan needs his fated arms prepare. 
Let all the Tuscans, all th' Arcadians, join! 
Nor these, nor those, shall frustrate my design. 
Let them not fear the treasons of the night, 
The robb'd Palladium, the pretended flight: 
Our onset shall be made in open light. 
No wooden engine shall their town betray; 
Fires they shall have around, but fires by day. 
No Grecian babes before their camp appear, 
Whom Hector's arms detain'd to the tenth tardy year. 
Now, since the sun is rolling to the west, 
Give we the silent night to needful rest: 
Refresh your bodies, and your arms prepare; 
The morn shall end the small remains of war." 
The post of honor to Messapus falls, 
To keep the nightly guard, to watch the walls, 
To pitch the fires at distances around, 
And close the Trojans in their scanty ground. 
Twice seven Rutulian captains ready stand, 
And twice seven hundred horse these chiefs command; 
All clad in shining arms the works invest, 
Each with a radiant helm and waving crest. 
Stretch'd at their length, they press the grassy ground;

They laugh, they sing, (the jolly bowls go round,) 
With lights and cheerful fires renew the day, 
And pass the wakeful night in feasts and play. 
The Trojans, from above, their foes beheld, 
And with arm'd legions all the rampires fill'd. 
Seiz'd with affright, their gates they first explore; 
Join works to works with bridges, tow'r to tow'r: 
Thus all things needful for defense abound. 
Mnestheus and brave Seresthus walk the round, 
Commission'd by their absent prince to share 
The common danger, and divide the care. 
The soldiers draw their lots, and, as they fall, 
By turns relieve each other on the wall. 
Nigh where the foes their utmost guards advance, 
To watch the gate was warlike Nisus' chance. 
His father Hyrtacus of noble blood; 
His mother was a huntress of the wood, 
And sent him to the wars. Well could he bear 
His lance in fight, and dart the flying spear, 
But better skill'd unerring shafts to send. 
Beside him stood Euryalus, his friend: 
Euryalus, than whom the Trojan host 
No fairer face, or sweeter air, could boast- 
Scarce had the down to shade his cheeks begun. 
One was their care, and their delight was one: 
One common hazard in the war they shar'd, 
And now were both by choice upon the guard. 
Then Nisus thus: "Or do the gods inspire 
This warmth, or make we gods of our desire? 
A gen'rous ardor boils within my breast, 
Eager of action, enemy to rest: 
This urges me to fight, and fires my mind 
To leave a memorable name behind. 
Thou see'st the foe secure; how faintly shine 
Their scatter'd fires! the most, in sleep supine 
Along the ground, an easy conquest lie: 
The wakeful few the fuming flagon ply; 
All hush'd around. Now hear what I revolve- 
A thought unripe- and scarcely yet resolve. 
Our absent prince both camp and council mourn; 
By message both would hasten his return: 
If they confer what I demand on thee, 
(For fame is recompense enough for me,) 
Methinks, beneath yon hill, I have espied 
A way that safely will my passage guide." 
Euryalus stood list'ning while he spoke, 
With love of praise and noble envy struck; 
Then to his ardent friend expos'd his mind: 
"All this, alone, and leaving me behind! 
Am I unworthy, Nisus, to be join'd? 
Thinkist thou I can my share of glory yield, 
Or send thee unassisted to the field? 
Not so my father taught my childhood arms; 
Born in a siege, and bred among alarms! 
Nor is my youth unworthy of my friend, 
Nor of the heav'n-born hero I attend. 
The thing call'd life, with ease I can disclaim, 
And think it over-sold to purchase fame." 
Then Nisus thus: "Alas! thy tender years 
Would minister new matter to my fears. 
So may the gods, who view this friendly strife, 
Restore me to thy lov'd embrace with life, 
Condemn'd to pay my vows, (as sure I trust,) 
This thy request is cruel and unjust. 
But if some chance- as many chances are, 
And doubtful hazards, in the deeds of war- 
If one should reach my head, there let it fall, 
And spare thy life; I would not perish all. 
Thy bloomy youth deserves a longer date: 
Live thou to mourn thy love's unhappy fate; 
To bear my mangled body from the foe, 
Or buy it back, and fun'ral rites bestow. 
Or, if hard fortune shall those dues deny, 
Thou canst at least an empty tomb supply. 
O let not me the widow's tears renew! 
Nor let a mother's curse my name pursue: 
Thy pious parent, who, for love of thee, 
Forsook the coasts of friendly Sicily, 
Her age committing to the seas and wind, 
When ev'ry weary matron stay'd behind." 
To this, Euryalus: "You plead in vain, 
And but protract the cause you cannot gain. 
No more delays, but haste!" With that, he wakes 
The nodding watch; each to his office takes. 
The guard reliev'd, the gen'rous couple went 
To find the council at the royal tent. 
All creatures else forgot their daily care, 
And sleep, the common gift of nature, share; 
Except the Trojan peers, who wakeful sate 
In nightly council for th' indanger'd state. 
They vote a message to their absent chief, 
Shew their distress, and beg a swift relief. 
Amid the camp a silent seat they chose, 
Remote from clamor, and secure from foes. 
On their left arms their ample shields they bear, 
The right reclin'd upon the bending spear. 
Now Nisus and his friend approach the guard, 
And beg admission, eager to be heard: 
Th' affair important, not to be deferr'd. 
Ascanius bids 'em be conducted in, 
Ord'ring the more experienc'd to begin. 
Then Nisus thus: "Ye fathers, lend your ears; 
Nor judge our bold attempt beyond our years. 
The foe, securely drench'd in sleep and wine, 
Neglect their watch; the fires but thinly shine; 
And where the smoke in cloudy vapors flies, 
Cov'ring the plain, and curling to the skies, 
Betwixt two paths, which at the gate divide, 
Close by the sea, a passage we have spied, 
Which will our way to great Aeneas guide. 
Expect each hour to see him safe again, 
Loaded with spoils of foes in battle slain. 
Snatch we the lucky minute while we may; 
Nor can we be mistaken in the way; 
For, hunting in the vale, we both have seen 
The rising turrets, and the stream between, 
And know the winding course, with ev'ry ford." 
He ceas'd; and old Alethes took the word: 
"Our country gods, in whom our trust we place, 
Will yet from ruin save the Trojan race, 
While we behold such dauntless worth appear 
In dawning youth, and souls so void of fear." 
Then into tears of joy the father broke; 
Each in his longing arms by turns he took; 
Panted and paus'd; and thus again he spoke: 
"Ye brave young men, what equal gifts can we, 
In recompense of such desert, decree? 
The greatest, sure, and best you can receive, 
The gods and your own conscious worth will give. 
The rest our grateful gen'ral will bestow, 
And young Ascanius till his manhood owe." 
"And I, whose welfare in my father lies," 
Ascanius adds, "by the great deities, 
By my dear country, by my household gods, 
By hoary Vesta's rites and dark abodes, 
Adjure you both, (on you my fortune stands; 
That and my faith I plight into your hands,) 
Make me but happy in his safe return, 
Whose wanted presence I can only mourn; 
Your common gift shall two large goblets be 
Of silver, wrought with curious imagery, 
And high emboss'd, which, when old Priam reign'd, 
My conqu'ring sire at sack'd Arisba gain'd; 
And more, two tripods cast in antic mold, 
With two great talents of the finest gold; 
Beside a costly bowl, ingrav'd with art, 
Which Dido gave, when first she gave her heart. 
But, if in conquer'd Italy we reign, 
When spoils by lot the victor shall obtain- 
Thou saw'st the courser by proud Turnus press'd: 
That, Nisus, and his arms, and nodding crest, 
And shield, from chance exempt, shall be thy share: 
Twelve lab'ring slaves, twelve handmaids young and fair 
All clad in rich attire, and train'd with care; 
And, last, a Latian field with fruitful plains, 
And a large portion of the king's domains. 
But thou, whose years are more to mine allied- 
No fate my vow'd affection shall divide 
From thee, heroic youth! Be wholly mine; 
Take full possession; all my soul is thine. 
One faith, one fame, one fate, shall both attend; 
My life's companion, and my bosom friend: 
My peace shall be committed to thy care, 
And to thy conduct my concerns in war." 
Then thus the young Euryalus replied: 
"Whatever fortune, good or bad, betide, 
The same shall be my age, as now my youth; 
No time shall find me wanting to my truth. 
This only from your goodness let me gain 
(And, this ungranted, all rewards are vain) 
Of Priam's royal race my mother came- 
And sure the best that ever bore the name- 
Whom neither Troy nor Sicily could hold 
From me departing, but, o'erspent and old, 
My fate she follow'd. Ignorant of this 
(Whatever) danger, neither parting kiss, 
Nor pious blessing taken, her I leave, 
And in this only act of all my life deceive. 
By this right hand and conscious Night I swear, 
My soul so sad a farewell could not bear. 
Be you her comfort; fill my vacant place 
(Permit me to presume so great a grace) 
Support her age, forsaken and distress'd. 
That hope alone will fortify my breast 
Against the worst of fortunes, and of fears." 
He said. The mov'd assistants melt in tears. 
Then thus Ascanius, wonderstruck to see 
That image of his filial piety: 
"So great beginnings, in so green an age, 
Exact the faith which I again ingage. 
Thy mother all the dues shall justly claim, 
Creusa had, and only want the name. 
Whate'er event thy bold attempt shall have, 
'T is merit to have borne a son so brave. 
Now by my head, a sacred oath, I swear, 
(My father us'd it,) what, returning here 
Crown'd with success, I for thyself prepare, 
That, if thou fail, shall thy lov'd mother share." 
He said, and weeping, while he spoke the word, 
From his broad belt he drew a shining sword, 
Magnificent with gold. Lycaon made, 
And in an ivory scabbard sheath'd the blade. 
This was his gift. Great Mnestheus gave his friend 
A lion's hide, his body to defend; 
And good Alethes furnish'd him, beside, 
With his own trusty helm, of temper tried. 
Thus arm'd they went. The noble Trojans wait 
Their issuing forth, and follow to the gate 
With prayers and vows. Above the rest appears 
Ascanius, manly far beyond his years, 
And messages committed to their care, 
Which all in winds were lost, and flitting air. 
The trenches first they pass'd; then took their way 
Where their proud foes in pitch'd pavilions lay; 
To many fatal, ere themselves were slain. 
They found the careless host dispers'd upon the plain, 
Who, gorg'd, and drunk with wine, supinely snore. 
Unharness'd chariots stand along the shore: 
Amidst the wheels and reins, the goblet by, 
A medley of debauch and war, they lie. 
Observing Nisus shew'd his friend the sight: 
"Behold a conquest gain'd without a fight. 
Occasion offers, and I stand prepar'd; 
There lies our way; be thou upon the guard, 
And look around, while I securely go, 
And hew a passage thro' the sleeping foe." 
Softly he spoke; then striding took his way, 
With his drawn sword, where haughty Rhamnes lay; 
His head rais'd high on tapestry beneath, 
And heaving from his breast, he drew his breath; 
A king and prophet, by King Turnus lov'd: 
But fate by prescience cannot be remov'd. 
Him and his sleeping slaves he slew; then spies 
Where Remus, with his rich retinue, lies. 
His armor-bearer first, and next he kills 
His charioteer, intrench'd betwixt the wheels 
And his lov'd horses; last invades their lord; 
Full on his neck he drives the fatal sword: 
The gasping head flies off; a purple flood 
Flows from the trunk, that welters in the blood, 
Which, by the spurning heels dispers'd around, 
The bed besprinkles and bedews the ground. 
Lamus the bold, and Lamyrus the strong, 
He slew, and then Serranus fair and young. 
From dice and wine the youth retir'd to rest, 
And puff'd the fumy god from out his breast: 
Ev'n then he dreamt of drink and lucky play- 
More lucky, had it lasted till the day. 
The famish'd lion thus, with hunger bold, 
O'erleaps the fences of the nightly fold, 
And tears the peaceful flocks: with silent awe 
Trembling they lie, and pant beneath his paw. 
Nor with less rage Euryalus employs 
The wrathful sword, or fewer foes destroys; 
But on th' ignoble crowd his fury flew; 
He Fadus, Hebesus, and Rhoetus slew. 
Oppress'd with heavy sleep the former fell, 
But Rhoetus wakeful, and observing all: 
Behind a spacious jar he slink'd for fear; 
The fatal iron found and reach'd him there; 
For, as he rose, it pierc'd his naked side, 
And, reeking, thence return'd in crimson dyed. 
The wound pours out a stream of wine and blood; 
The purple soul comes floating in the flood. 
Now, where Messapus quarter'd, they arrive. 
The fires were fainting there, and just alive; 
The warrior-horses, tied in order, fed. 
Nisus observ'd the discipline, and said: 
"Our eager thirst of blood may both betray; 
And see the scatter'd streaks of dawning day, 
Foe to nocturnal thefts. No more, my friend; 
Here let our glutted execution end. 
A lane thro' slaughter'd bodies we have made." 
The bold Euryalus, tho' loth, obey'd. 
Of arms, and arras, and of plate, they find 
A precious load; but these they leave behind. 
Yet, fond of gaudy spoils, the boy would stay 
To make the rich caparison his prey, 
Which on the steed of conquer'd Rhamnes lay. 
Nor did his eyes less longingly behold 
The girdle-belt, with nails of burnish'd gold. 
This present Caedicus the rich bestow'd 
On Remulus, when friendship first they vow'd, 
And, absent, join'd in hospitable ties: 
He, dying, to his heir bequeath'd the prize; 
Till, by the conqu'ring Ardean troops oppress'd, 
He fell; and they the glorious gift possess'd. 
These glitt'ring spoils (now made the victor's gain) 
He to his body suits, but suits in vain: 
Messapus' helm he finds among the rest, 
And laces on, and wears the waving crest. 
Proud of their conquest, prouder of their prey, 
They leave the camp, and take the ready way. 
But far they had not pass'd, before they spied 
Three hundred horse, with Volscens for their guide. 
The queen a legion to King Turnus sent; 
But the swift horse the slower foot prevent, 
And now, advancing, sought the leader's tent. 
They saw the pair; for, thro' the doubtful shade, 
His shining helm Euryalus betray'd, 
On which the moon with full reflection play'd. 
"'T is not for naught," cried Volscens from the crowd, 
"These men go there;" then rais'd his voice aloud: 
"Stand! stand! why thus in arms? And whither bent? 
From whence, to whom, and on what errand sent?" 
Silent they scud away, and haste their flight 
To neighb'ring woods, and trust themselves to night. 
The speedy horse all passages belay, 
And spur their smoking steeds to cross their way, 
And watch each entrance of the winding wood. 
Black was the forest: thick with beech it stood, 
Horrid with fern, and intricate with thorn; 
Few paths of human feet, or tracks of beasts, were worn.

The darkness of the shades, his heavy prey, 
And fear, misled the younger from his way. 
But Nisus hit the turns with happier haste, 
And, thoughtless of his friend, the forest pass'd, 
And Alban plains, from Alba's name so call'd, 
Where King Latinus then his oxen stall'd; 
Till, turning at the length, he stood his ground, 
And miss'd his friend, and cast his eyes around: 
"Ah wretch!" he cried, "where have I left behind 
Th' unhappy youth? where shall I hope to find? 
Or what way take?" Again he ventures back, 
And treads the mazes of his former track. 
He winds the wood, and, list'ning, hears the noise 
Of tramping coursers, and the riders' voice. 
The sound approach'd; and suddenly he view'd 
The foes inclosing, and his friend pursued, 
Forelaid and taken, while he strove in vain 
The shelter of the friendly shades to gain. 
What should he next attempt? what arms employ, 
What fruitless force, to free the captive boy? 
Or desperate should he rush and lose his life, 
With odds oppress'd, in such unequal strife? 
Resolv'd at length, his pointed spear he shook; 
And, casting on the moon a mournful look: 
"Guardian of groves, and goddess of the night, 
Fair queen," he said, "direct my dart aright. 
If e'er my pious father, for my sake, 
Did grateful off'rings on thy altars make, 
Or I increas'd them with my sylvan toils, 
And hung thy holy roofs with savage spoils, 
Give me to scatter these." Then from his ear 
He pois'd, and aim'd, and launch'd the trembling spear. 
The deadly weapon, hissing from the grove, 
Impetuous on the back of Sulmo drove; 
Pierc'd his thin armor, drank his vital blood, 
And in his body left the broken 
He staggers round; his eyeballs roll in death, 
And with short sobs he gasps away his breath. 
All stand amaz'd- a second jav'lin flies 
With equal strength, and quivers thro' the skies. 
This thro' thy temples, Tagus, forc'd the way, 
And in the brainpan warmly buried lay. 
Fierce Volscens foams with rage, and, gazing round, 
Descried not him who gave the fatal wound, 
Nor knew to fix revenge: "But thou," he cries, 
"Shalt pay for both," and at the pris'ner flies 
With his drawn sword. Then, struck with deep despair, 
That cruel sight the lover could not bear; 
But from his covert rush'd in open view, 
And sent his voice before him as he flew: 
"Me! me!" he cried- "turn all your swords alone 
On me- the fact confess'd, the fault my own. 
He neither could nor durst, the guiltless youth: 
Ye moon and stars, bear witness to the truth! 
His only crime (if friendship can offend) 
Is too much love to his unhappy friend." 
Too late he speaks: the sword, which fury guides, 
Driv'n with full force, had pierc'd his tender sides. 
Down fell the beauteous youth: the yawning wound 
Gush'd out a purple stream, and stain'd the ground. 
His snowy neck reclines upon his breast, 
Like a fair flow'r by the keen share oppress'd; 
Like a white poppy sinking on the plain, 
Whose heavy head is overcharg'd with rain. 
Despair, and rage, and vengeance justly vow'd, 
Drove Nisus headlong on the hostile crowd. 
Volscens he seeks; on him alone he bends: 
Borne back and bor'd by his surrounding friends, 
Onward he press'd, and kept him still in sight; 
Then whirl'd aloft his sword with all his might: 
Th' unerring steel descended while he spoke, 
Piered his wide mouth, and thro' his weazon broke. 
Dying, he slew; and, stagg'ring on the plain, 
With swimming eyes he sought his lover slain; 
Then quiet on his bleeding bosom fell, 
Content, in death, to be reveng'd so well. 
O happy friends! for, if my verse can give 
Immortal life, your fame shall ever live, 
Fix'd as the Capitol's foundation lies, 
And spread, where'er the Roman eagle flies! 
The conqu'ring party first divide the prey, 
Then their slain leader to the camp convey. 
With wonder, as they went, the troops were fill'd, 
To see such numbers whom so few had kill'd. 
Serranus, Rhamnes, and the rest, they found: 
Vast crowds the dying and the dead surround; 
And the yet reeking blood o'erflows the ground. 
All knew the helmet which Messapus lost, 
But mourn'd a purchase that so dear had cost. 
Now rose the ruddy morn from Tithon's bed, 
And with the dawn of day the skies o'erspread; 
Nor long the sun his daily course withheld, 
But added colors to the world reveal'd: 
When early Turnus, wak'ning with the light, 
All clad in armor, calls his troops to fight. 
His martial men with fierce harangue he fir'd, 
And his own ardor in their souls inspir'd. 
This done- to give new terror to his foes, 
The heads of Nisus and his friend he shows, 
Rais'd high on pointed spears- a ghastly sight: 
Loud peals of shouts ensue, and barbarous delight. 
Meantime the Trojans run, where danger calls; 
They line their trenches, and they man their walls. 
In front extended to the left they stood; 
Safe was the right, surrounded by the flood. 
But, casting from their tow'rs a frightful view, 
They saw the faces, which too well they knew, 
Tho' then disguis'd in death, and smear'd all o'er 
With filth obscene, and dropping putrid gore. 
Soon hasty fame thro' the sad city bears 
The mournful message to the mother's ears. 
An icy cold benumbs her limbs; she shakes; 
Her cheeks the blood, her hand the web forsakes. 
She runs the rampires round amidst the war, 
Nor fears the flying darts; she rends her hair, 
And fills with loud laments the liquid air. 
"Thus, then, my lov'd Euryalus appears! 
Thus looks the prop my declining years! 
Was't on this face my famish'd eyes I fed? 
Ah! how unlike the living is the dead! 
And could'st thou leave me, cruel, thus alone? 
Not one kind kiss from a departing son! 
No look, no last adieu before he went, 
In an ill-boding hour to slaughter sent! 
Cold on the ground, and pressing foreign clay, 
To Latian dogs and fowls he lies a prey! 
Nor was I near to close his dying eyes, 
To wash his wounds, to weep his obsequies, 
To call about his corpse his crying friends, 
Or spread the mantle (made for other ends) 
On his dear body, which I wove with care, 
Nor did my daily pains or nightly labor spare. 
Where shall I find his corpse? what earth sustains 
His trunk dismember'd, and his cold remains? 
For this, alas! I left my needful ease, 
Expos'd my life to winds and winter seas! 
If any pity touch Rutulian hearts, 
Here empty all your quivers, all your darts; 
Or, if they fail, thou, Jove, conclude my woe, 
And send me thunderstruck to shades below!" 
Her shrieks and clamors pierce the Trojans' ears, 
Unman their courage, and augment their fears; 
Nor young Ascanius could the sight sustain, 
Nor old Ilioneus his tears restrain, 
But Actor and Idaeus jointly sent, 
To bear the madding mother to her tent. 
And now the trumpets terribly, from far, 
With rattling clangor, rouse the sleepy war. 
The soldiers' shouts succeed the brazen sounds; 
And heav'n, from pole to pole, the noise rebounds. 
The Volscians bear their shields upon their head, 
And, rushing forward, form a moving shed. 
These fill the ditch; those pull the bulwarks down: 
Some raise the ladders; others scale the town. 
But, where void spaces on the walls appear, 
Or thin defense, they pour their forces there. 
With poles and missive weapons, from afar, 
The Trojans keep aloof the rising war. 
Taught, by their ten years' siege, defensive fight, 
They roll down ribs of rocks, an unresisted weight, 
To break the penthouse with the pond'rous blow, 
Which yet the patient Volscians undergo: 
But could not bear th' unequal combat long; 
For, where the Trojans find the thickest throng, 
The ruin falls: their shatter'd shields give way, 
And their crush'd heads become an easy prey. 
They shrink for fear, abated of their rage, 
Nor longer dare in a blind fight engage; 
Contented now to gall them from below 
With darts and slings, and with the distant bow. 
Elsewhere Mezentius, terrible to view, 
A blazing pine within the trenches threw. 
But brave Messapus, Neptune's warlike son, 
Broke down the palisades, the trenches won, 
And loud for ladders calls, to scale the town. 
Calliope, begin! Ye sacred Nine, 
Inspire your poet in his high design, 
To sing what slaughter manly Turnus made, 
What souls he sent below the Stygian shade, 
What fame the soldiers with their captain share, 
And the vast circuit of the fatal war; 
For you in singing martial facts excel; 
You best remember, and alone can tell. 
There stood a tow'r, amazing to the sight, 
Built up of beams, and of stupendous height: 
Art, and the nature of the place, conspir'd 
To furnish all the strength that war requir'd. 
To level this, the bold Italians join; 
The wary Trojans obviate their design; 
With weighty stones o'erwhelm their troops below, 
Shoot thro' the loopholes, and sharp jav'lins throw. 
Turnus, the chief, toss'd from his thund'ring hand 
Against the wooden walls, a flaming brand: 
It stuck, the fiery plague; the winds were high; 
The planks were season'd, and the timber dry. 
Contagion caught the posts; it spread along, 
Scorch'd, and to distance drove the scatter'd throng. 
The Trojans fled; the fire pursued amain, 
Still gath'ring fast upon the trembling train; 
Till, crowding to the corners of the wall, 
Down the defense and the defenders fall. 
The mighty flaw makes heav'n itself resound: 
The dead and dying Trojans strew the ground. 
The tow'r, that follow'd on the fallen crew, 
Whelm'd o'er their heads, and buried whom it slew: 
Some stuck upon the darts themselves had sent; 
All the same equal ruin underwent. 
Young Lycus and Helenor only scape; 
Sav'd- how, they know not- from the steepy leap. 
Helenor, elder of the two: by birth, 
On one side royal, one a son of earth, 
Whom to the Lydian king Licymnia bare, 
And sent her boasted bastard to the war 
(A privilege which none but freemen share). 
Slight were his arms, a sword and silver shield: 
No marks of honor charg'd its empty field. 
Light as he fell, so light the youth arose, 
And rising, found himself amidst his foes; 
Nor flight was left, nor hopes to force his way. 
Embolden'd by despair, he stood at bay; 
And- like a stag, whom all the troop surrounds 
Of eager huntsmen and invading hounds- 
Resolv'd on death, he dissipates his fears, 
And bounds aloft against the pointed spears: 
So dares the youth, secure of death; and throws 
His dying body on his thickest foes. 
But Lycus, swifter of his feet by far, 
Runs, doubles, winds and turns, amidst the war; 
Springs to the walls, and leaves his foes behind, 
And snatches at the beam he first can find; 
Looks up, and leaps aloft at all the stretch, 
In hopes the helping hand of some kind friend to reach. 
But Turnus follow'd hard his hunted prey 
(His spear had almost reach'd him in the way, 
Short of his reins, and scarce a span behind) 
"Fool!" said the chief, "tho' fleeter than the wind, 
Couldst thou presume to scape, when I pursue?" 
He said, and downward by the feet he drew 
The trembling dastard; at the tug he falls; 
Vast ruins come along, rent from the smoking walls. 
Thus on some silver swan, or tim'rous hare, 
Jove's bird comes sousing down from upper air; 
Her crooked talons truss the fearful prey: 
Then out of sight she soars, and wings her way. 
So seizes the grim wolf the tender lamb, 
In vain lamented by the bleating dam. 
Then rushing onward with a barb'rous cry, 
The troops of Turnus to the combat fly. 
The ditch with fagots fill'd, the daring foe 
Toss'd firebrands to the steepy turrets throw. 
Ilioneus, as bold Lucetius came 
To force the gate, and feed the kindling flame, 
Roll'd down the fragment of a rock so right, 
It crush'd him double underneath the weight. 
Two more young Liger and Asylas slew: 
To bend the bow young Liger better knew; 
Asylas best the pointed jav'lin threw. 
Brave Caeneus laid Ortygius on the plain; 
The victor Caeneus was by Turnus slain. 
By the same hand, Clonius and Itys fall, 
Sagar, and Ida, standing on the wall. 
From Capys' arms his fate Privernus found: 
Hurt by Themilla first-but slight the wound- 
His shield thrown by, to mitigate the smart, 
He clapp'd his hand upon the wounded part: 
The second shaft came swift and unespied, 
And pierc'd his hand, and nail'd it to his side, 
Transfix'd his breathing lungs and beating heart: 
The soul came issuing out, and hiss'd against the dart. 
The son of Arcens shone amid the rest, 
In glitt'ring armor and a purple vest, 
(Fair was his face, his eyes inspiring love,) 
Bred by his father in the Martian grove, 
Where the fat altars of Palicus flame, 
And send in arms to purchase early fame. 
Him when he spied from far, the Tuscan king 
Laid by the lance, and took him to the sling, 
Thrice whirl'd the thong around his head, and threw: 
The heated lead half melted as it flew; 
It pierc'd his hollow temples and his brain; 
The youth came tumbling down, and spurn'd the plain. 
Then young Ascanius, who, before this day, 
Was wont in woods to shoot the savage prey, 
First bent in martial strife the twanging bow, 
And exercis'd against a human foe- 
With this bereft Numanus of his life, 
Who Turnus' younger sister took to wife. 
Proud of his realm, and of his royal bride, 
Vaunting before his troops, and lengthen'd with a stride,

In these insulting terms the Trojans he defied: 
"Twice-conquer'd cowards, now your shame is shown- 
Coop'd up a second time within your town! 
Who dare not issue forth in open field, 
But hold your walls before you for a shield. 
Thus threat you war? thus our alliance force? 
What gods, what madness, hether steer'd your course? 
You shall not find the sons of Atreus here, 
Nor need the frauds of sly Ulysses fear. 
Strong from the cradle, of a sturdy brood, 
We bear our newborn infants to the flood; 
There bath'd amid the stream, our boys we hold, 
With winter harden'd, and inur'd to cold. 
They wake before the day to range the wood, 
Kill ere they eat, nor taste unconquer'd food. 
No sports, but what belong to war, they know: 
To break the stubborn colt, to bend the bow. 
Our youth, of labor patient, earn their bread; 
Hardly they work, with frugal diet fed. 
From plows and harrows sent to seek renown, 
They fight in fields, and storm the shaken town. 
No part of life from toils of war is free, 
No change in age, or diff'rence in degree. 
We plow and till in arms; our oxen feel, 
Instead of goads, the spur and pointed steel; 
Th' inverted lance makes furrows in the plain. 
Ev'n time, that changes all, yet changes us in vain: 
The body, not the mind; nor can control 
Th' immortal vigor, or abate the soul. 
Our helms defend the young, disguise the gray: 
We live by plunder, and delight in prey. 
Your vests embroider'd with rich purple shine; 
In sloth you glory, and in dances join. 
Your vests have sweeping sleeves; with female pride 
Your turbants underneath your chins are tied. 
Go, Phrygians, to your Dindymus again! 
Go, less than women, in the shapes of men! 
Go, mix'd with eunuchs, in the Mother's rites, 
Where with unequal sound the flute invites; 
Sing, dance, and howl, by turns, in Ida's shade: 
Resign the war to men, who know the martial trade!" 
This foul reproach Ascanius could not hear 
With patience, or a vow'd revenge forbear. 
At the full stretch of both his hands he drew, 
And almost join'd the horns of the tough yew. 
But, first, before the throne of Jove he stood, 
And thus with lifted hands invok'd the god: 
"My first attempt, great Jupiter, succeed! 
An annual off'ring in thy grove shall bleed; 
A snow-white steer, before thy altar led, 
Who, like his mother, bears aloft his head, 
Butts with his threat'ning brows, and bellowing stands, 
And dares the fight, and spurns the yellow sands." 
Jove bow'd the heav'ns, and lent a gracious ear, 
And thunder'd on the left, amidst the clear. 
Sounded at once the bow; and swiftly flies 
The feather'd death, and hisses thro' the skies. 
The steel thro' both his temples forc'd the way: 
Extended on the ground, Numanus lay. 
"Go now, vain boaster, and true valor scorn! 
The Phrygians, twice subdued, yet make this third return."

Ascanius said no more. The Trojans shake 
The heav'ns with shouting, and new vigor take. 
Apollo then bestrode a golden cloud, 
To view the feats of arms, and fighting crowd; 
And thus the beardless victor he bespoke aloud: 
"Advance, illustrious youth, increase in fame, 
And wide from east to west extend thy name; 
Offspring of gods thyself; and Rome shall owe 
To thee a race of demigods below. 
This is the way to heav'n: the pow'rs divine 
From this beginning date the Julian line. 
To thee, to them, and their victorious heirs, 
The conquer'd war is due, and the vast world is theirs. 
Troy is too narrow for thy name." He said, 
And plunging downward shot his radiant head; 
Dispell'd the breathing air, that broke his flight: 
Shorn of his beams, a man to mortal sight. 
Old Butes' form he took, Anchises' squire, 
Now left, to rule Ascanius, by his sire: 
His wrinkled visage, and his hoary hairs, 
His mien, his habit, and his arms, he wears, 
And thus salutes the boy, too forward for his years: 
"Suffice it thee, thy father's worthy son, 
The warlike prize thou hast already won. 
The god of archers gives thy youth a part 
Of his own praise, nor envies equal art. 
Now tempt the war no more." He said, and flew 
Obscure in air, and vanish'd from their view. 
The Trojans, by his arms, their patron know, 
And hear the twanging of his heav'nly bow. 
Then duteous force they use, and Phoebus' name, 
To keep from fight the youth too fond of fame. 
Undaunted, they themselves no danger shun; 
From wall to wall the shouts and clamors run. 
They bend their bows; they whirl their slings around; 
Heaps of spent arrows fall, and strew the ground; 
And helms, and shields, and rattling arms resound. 
The combat thickens, like the storm that flies 
From westward, when the show'ry Kids arise; 
Or patt'ring hail comes pouring on the main, 
When Jupiter descends in harden'd rain, 
Or bellowing clouds burst with a stormy sound, 
And with an armed winter strew the ground. 
Pand'rus and Bitias, thunderbolts of war, 
Whom Hiera to bold Alcanor bare 
On Ida's top, two youths of height and size 
Like firs that on their mother mountain rise, 
Presuming on their force, the gates unbar, 
And of their own accord invite the war. 
With fates averse, against their king's command, 
Arm'd, on the right and on the left they stand, 
And flank the passage: shining steel they wear, 
And waving crests above their heads appear. 
Thus two tall oaks, that Padus' banks adorn, 
Lift up to heav'n their leafy heads unshorn, 
And, overpress'd with nature's heavy load, 
Dance to the whistling winds, and at each other nod. 
In flows a tide of Latians, when they see 
The gate set open, and the passage free; 
Bold Quercens, with rash Tmarus, rushing on, 
Equicolus, that in bright armor shone, 
And Haemon first; but soon repuls'd they fly, 
Or in the well-defended pass they die. 
These with success are fir'd, and those with rage, 
And each on equal terms at length ingage. 
Drawn from their lines, and issuing on the plain, 
The Trojans hand to hand the fight maintain. 
Fierce Turnus in another quarter fought, 
When suddenly th' unhop'd-for news was brought, 
The foes had left the fastness of their place, 
Prevail'd in fight, and had his men in chase. 
He quits th' attack, and, to prevent their fate, 
Runs where the giant brothers guard the gate. 
The first he met, Antiphates the brave, 
But base-begotten on a Theban slave, 
Sarpedon's son, he slew: the deadly dart 
Found passage thro' his breast, and pierc'd his heart. 
Fix'd in the wound th' Italian cornel stood, 
Warm'd in his lungs, and in his vital blood. 
Aphidnus next, and Erymanthus dies, 
And Meropes, and the gigantic size 
Of Bitias, threat'ning with his ardent eyes. 
Not by the feeble dart he fell oppress'd 
(A dart were lost within that roomy breast), 
But from a knotted lance, large, heavy, strong, 
Which roar'd like thunder as it whirl'd along: 
Not two bull hides th' impetuous force withhold, 
Nor coat of double mail, with scales of gold. 
Down sunk the monster bulk and press'd the ground; 
His arms and clatt'ring shield on the vast body sound, 
Not with less ruin than the Bajan mole, 
Rais'd on the seas, the surges to control- 
At once comes tumbling down the rocky wall; 
Prone to the deep, the stones disjointed fall 
Of the vast pile; the scatter'd ocean flies; 
Black sands, discolor'd froth, and mingled mud arise: 
The frighted billows roll, and seek the shores; 
Then trembles Prochyta, then Ischia roars: 
Typhoeus, thrown beneath, by Jove's command, 
Astonish'd at the flaw that shakes the land, 
Soon shifts his weary side, and, scarce awake, 
With wonder feels the weight press lighter on his back. 
The warrior god the Latian troops inspir'd, 
New strung their sinews, and their courage fir'd, 
But chills the Trojan hearts with cold affright: 
Then black despair precipitates their flight. 
When Pandarus beheld his brother kill'd, 
The town with fear and wild confusion fill'd, 
He turns the hinges of the heavy gate 
With both his hands, and adds his shoulders to the weight

Some happier friends within the walls inclos'd; 
The rest shut out, to certain death expos'd: 
Fool as he was, and frantic in his care, 
T' admit young Turnus, and include the war! 
He thrust amid the crowd, securely bold, 
Like a fierce tiger pent amid the fold. 
Too late his blazing buckler they descry, 
And sparkling fires that shot from either eye, 
His mighty members, and his ample breast, 
His rattling armor, and his crimson crest. 
Far from that hated face the Trojans fly, 
All but the fool who sought his destiny. 
Mad Pandarus steps forth, with vengeance vow'd 
For Bitias' death, and threatens thus aloud: 
"These are not Ardea's walls, nor this the town 
Amata proffers with Lavinia's crown: 
'T is hostile earth you tread. Of hope bereft, 
No means of safe return by flight are left." 
To whom, with count'nance calm, and soul sedate, 
Thus Turnus: "Then begin, and try thy fate: 
My message to the ghost of Priam bear; 
Tell him a new Achilles sent thee there." 
A lance of tough ground ash the Trojan threw, 
Rough in the rind, and knotted as it grew: 
With his full force he whirl'd it first around; 
But the soft yielding air receiv'd the wound: 
Imperial Juno turn'd the course before, 
And fix'd the wand'ring weapon in the door. 
"But hope not thou," said Turnus, "when I strike, 
To shun thy fate: our force is not alike, 
Nor thy steel temper'd by the Lemnian god." 
Then rising, on his utmost stretch he stood, 
And aim'd from high: the full descending blow 
Cleaves the broad front and beardless cheeks in two. 
Down sinks the giant with a thund'ring sound: 
His pond'rous limbs oppress the trembling ground; 
Blood, brains, and foam gush from the gaping wound: 
Scalp, face, and shoulders the keen steel divides, 
And the shar'd visage hangs on equal sides. 
The Trojans fly from their approaching fate; 
And, had the victor then secur'd the gate, 
And to his troops without unclos'd the bars, 
One lucky day had ended all his wars. 
But boiling youth, and blind desire of blood, 
Push'd on his fury, to pursue the crowd. 
Hamstring'd behind, unhappy Gyges died; 
Then Phalaris is added to his side. 
The pointed jav'lins from the dead he drew, 
And their friends' arms against their fellows threw. 
Strong Halys stands in vain; weak Phlegys flies; 
Saturnia, still at hand, new force and fire supplies. 
Then Halius, Prytanis, Alcander fall- 
Ingag'd against the foes who scal'd the wall: 
But, whom they fear'd without, they found within. 
At last, tho' late, by Lynceus he was seen. 
He calls new succors, and assaults the prince: 
But weak his force, and vain is their defense. 
Turn'd to the right, his sword the hero drew, 
And at one blow the bold aggressor slew. 
He joints the neck; and, with a stroke so strong, 
The helm flies off, and bears the head along. 
Next him, the huntsman Amycus he kill'd, 
In darts invenom'd and in poison skill'd. 
Then Clytius fell beneath his fatal spear, 
And Creteus, whom the Muses held so dear: 
He fought with courage, and he sung the fight; 
Arms were his bus'ness, verses his delight. 
The Trojan chiefs behold, with rage and grief, 
Their slaughter'd friends, and hasten their relief. 
Bold Mnestheus rallies first the broken train, 
Whom brave Seresthus and his troop sustain. 
To save the living, and revenge the dead, 
Against one warrior's arms all Troy they led. 
"O, void of sense and courage!" Mnestheus cried, 
"Where can you hope your coward heads to hide? 
Ah! where beyond these rampires can you run? 
One man, and in your camp inclos'd, you shun! 
Shall then a single sword such slaughter boast, 
And pass unpunish'd from a num'rous host? 
Forsaking honor, and renouncing fame, 
Your gods, your country, and your king you shame!" 
This just reproach their virtue does excite: 
They stand, they join, they thicken to the fight. 
Now Turnus doubts, and yet disdains to yield, 
But with slow paces measures back the field, 
And inches to the walls, where Tiber's tide, 
Washing the camp, defends the weaker side. 
The more he loses, they advance the more, 
And tread in ev'ry step he trod before. 
They shout: they bear him back; and, whom by might 
They cannot conquer, they oppress with weight. 
As, compass'd with a wood of spears around, 
The lordly lion still maintains his ground; 
Grins horrible, retires, and turns again; 
Threats his distended paws, and shakes his mane; 
He loses while in vain he presses on, 
Nor will his courage let him dare to run: 
So Turnus fares, and, unresolved of flight, 
Moves tardy back, and just recedes from fight. 
Yet twice, inrag'd, the combat he renews, 
Twice breaks, and twice his broken foes pursues. 
But now they swarm, and, with fresh troops supplied, 
Come rolling on, and rush from ev'ry side: 
Nor Juno, who sustain'd his arms before, 
Dares with new strength suffice th' exhausted store; 
For Jove, with sour commands, sent Iris down, 
To force th' invader from the frighted town. 
With labor spent, no longer can he wield 
The heavy fanchion, or sustain the shield, 
O'erwhelm'd with darts, which from afar they fling: 
The weapons round his hollow temples ring; 
His golden helm gives way, with stony blows 
Batter'd, and flat, and beaten to his brows. 
His crest is rash'd away; his ample shield 
Is falsified, and round with jav'lins fill'd. 
The foe, now faint, the Trojans overwhelm; 
And Mnestheus lays hard load upon his helm. 
Sick sweat succeeds; he drops at ev'ry pore; 
With driving dust his cheeks are pasted o'er; 
Shorter and shorter ev'ry gasp he takes; 
And vain efforts and hurtless blows he makes. 
Plung'd in the flood, and made the waters fly. 
The yellow god the welcome burthen bore, 
And wip'd the sweat, and wash'd away the gore; 
Then gently wafts him to the farther coast, 
And sends him safe to cheer his anxious host. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK X

The gates of heav'n unfold: Jove summons all 
The gods to council in the common hall. 
Sublimely seated, he surveys from far 
The fields, the camp, the fortune of the war, 
And all th' inferior world. From first to last, 
The sov'reign senate in degrees are plac'd. 
Then thus th' almighty sire began: "Ye gods, 
Natives or denizens of blest abodes, 
From whence these murmurs, and this change of mind, 
This backward fate from what was first design'd? 
Why this protracted war, when my commands 
Pronounc'd a peace, and gave the Latian lands? 
What fear or hope on either part divides 
Our heav'ns, and arms our powers on diff'rent sides? 
A lawful time of war at length will come, 
(Nor need your haste anticipate the doom), 
When Carthage shall contend the world with Rome, 
Shall force the rigid rocks and Alpine chains, 
And, like a flood, come pouring on the plains. 
Then is your time for faction and debate, 
For partial favor, and permitted hate. 
Let now your immature dissension cease; 
Sit quiet, and compose your souls to peace." 
Thus Jupiter in few unfolds the charge; 
But lovely Venus thus replies at large: 
"O pow'r immense, eternal energy, 
(For to what else protection can we fly?) 
Seest thou the proud Rutulians, how they dare 
In fields, unpunish'd, and insult my care? 
How lofty Turnus vaunts amidst his train, 
In shining arms, triumphant on the plain? 
Ev'n in their lines and trenches they contend, 
And scarce their walls the Trojan troops defend: 
The town is fill'd with slaughter, and o'erfloats, 
With a red deluge, their increasing moats. 
Aeneas, ignorant, and far from thence, 
Has left a camp expos'd, without defense. 
This endless outrage shall they still sustain? 
Shall Troy renew'd be forc'd and fir'd again? 
A second siege my banish'd issue fears, 
And a new Diomede in arms appears. 
One more audacious mortal will be found; 
And I, thy daughter, wait another wound. 
Yet, if with fates averse, without thy leave, 
The Latian lands my progeny receive, 
Bear they the pains of violated law, 
And thy protection from their aid withdraw. 
But, if the gods their sure success foretell; 
If those of heav'n consent with those of hell, 
To promise Italy; who dare debate 
The pow'r of Jove, or fix another fate? 
What should I tell of tempests on the main, 
Of Aeolus usurping Neptune's reign? 
Of Iris sent, with Bacchanalian heat 
T' inspire the matrons, and destroy the fleet? 
Now Juno to the Stygian sky descends, 
Solicits hell for aid, and arms the fiends. 
That new example wanted yet above: 
An act that well became the wife of Jove! 
Alecto, rais'd by her, with rage inflames 
The peaceful bosoms of the Latian dames. 
Imperial sway no more exalts my mind; 
(Such hopes I had indeed, while Heav'n was kind;) 
Now let my happier foes possess my place, 
Whom Jove prefers before the Trojan race; 
And conquer they, whom you with conquest grace. 
Since you can spare, from all your wide command, 
No spot of earth, no hospitable land, 
Which may my wand'ring fugitives receive; 
(Since haughty Juno will not give you leave;) 
Then, father, (if I still may use that name,) 
By ruin'd Troy, yet smoking from the flame, 
I beg you, let Ascanius, by my care, 
Be freed from danger, and dismiss'd the war: 
Inglorious let him live, without a crown. 
The father may be cast on coasts unknown, 
Struggling with fate; but let me save the son. 
Mine is Cythera, mine the Cyprian tow'rs: 
In those recesses, and those sacred bow'rs, 
Obscurely let him rest; his right resign 
To promis'd empire, and his Julian line. 
Then Carthage may th' Ausonian towns destroy, 
Nor fear the race of a rejected boy. 
What profits it my son to scape the fire, 
Arm'd with his gods, and loaded with his sire; 
To pass the perils of the seas and wind; 
Evade the Greeks, and leave the war behind; 
To reach th' Italian shores; if, after all, 
Our second Pergamus is doom'd to fall? 
Much better had he curb'd his high desires, 
And hover'd o'er his ill-extinguish'd fires. 
To Simois' banks the fugitives restore, 
And give them back to war, and all the woes before." 
Deep indignation swell'd Saturnia's heart: 
"And must I own," she said, "my secret smart- 
What with more decence were in silence kept, 
And, but for this unjust reproach, had slept? 
Did god or man your fav'rite son advise, 
With war unhop'd the Latians to surprise? 
By fate, you boast, and by the gods' decree, 
He left his native land for Italy! 
Confess the truth; by mad Cassandra, more 
Than Heav'n inspir'd, he sought a foreign shore! 
Did I persuade to trust his second Troy 
To the raw conduct of a beardless boy, 
With walls unfinish'd, which himself forsakes, 
And thro' the waves a wand'ring voyage takes? 
When have I urg'd him meanly to demand 
The Tuscan aid, and arm a quiet land? 
Did I or Iris give this mad advice, 
Or made the fool himself the fatal choice? 
You think it hard, the Latians should destroy 
With swords your Trojans, and with fires your Troy! 
Hard and unjust indeed, for men to draw 
Their native air, nor take a foreign law! 
That Turnus is permitted still to live, 
To whom his birth a god and goddess give! 
But yet is just and lawful for your line 
To drive their fields, and force with fraud to join; 
Realms, not your own, among your clans divide, 
And from the bridegroom tear the promis'd bride; 
Petition, while you public arms prepare; 
Pretend a peace, and yet provoke a war! 
'T was giv'n to you, your darling son to shroud, 
To draw the dastard from the fighting crowd, 
And, for a man, obtend an empty cloud. 
From flaming fleets you turn'd the fire away, 
And chang'd the ships to daughters of the sea. 
But is my crime- the Queen of Heav'n offends, 
If she presume to save her suff'ring friends! 
Your son, not knowing what his foes decree, 
You say, is absent: absent let him be. 
Yours is Cythera, yours the Cyprian tow'rs, 
The soft recesses, and the sacred bow'rs. 
Why do you then these needless arms prepare, 
And thus provoke a people prone to war? 
Did I with fire the Trojan town deface, 
Or hinder from return your exil'd race? 
Was I the cause of mischief, or the man 
Whose lawless lust the fatal war began? 
Think on whose faith th' adult'rous youth relied; 
Who promis'd, who procur'd, the Spartan bride? 
When all th' united states of Greece combin'd, 
To purge the world of the perfidious kind, 
Then was your time to fear the Trojan fate: 
Your quarrels and complaints are now too late." 
Thus Juno. Murmurs rise, with mix'd applause, 
Just as they favor or dislike the cause. 
So winds, when yet unfledg'd in woods they lie, 
In whispers first their tender voices try, 
Then issue on the main with bellowing rage, 
And storms to trembling mariners presage. 
Then thus to both replied th' imperial god, 
Who shakes heav'n's axles with his awful nod. 
(When he begins, the silent senate stand 
With rev'rence, list'ning to the dread command: 
The clouds dispel; the winds their breath restrain; 
And the hush'd waves lie flatted on the main.) 
"Celestials, your attentive ears incline! 
Since," said the god, "the Trojans must not join 
In wish'd alliance with the Latian line; 
Since endless jarrings and immortal hate 
Tend but to discompose our happy state; 
The war henceforward be resign'd to fate: 
Each to his proper fortune stand or fall; 
Equal and unconcern'd I look on all. 
Rutulians, Trojans, are the same to me; 
And both shall draw the lots their fates decree. 
Let these assault, if Fortune be their friend; 
And, if she favors those, let those defend: 
The Fates will find their way." The Thund'rer said, 
And shook the sacred honors of his head, 
Attesting Styx, th' inviolable flood, 
And the black regions of his brother god. 
Trembled the poles of heav'n, and earth confess'd the nod.

This end the sessions had: the senate rise, 
And to his palace wait their sov'reign thro' the skies. 
Meantime, intent upon their siege, the foes 
Within their walls the Trojan host inclose: 
They wound, they kill, they watch at ev'ry gate; 
Renew the fires, and urge their happy fate. 
Th' Aeneans wish in vain their wanted chief, 
Hopeless of flight, more hopeless of relief. 
Thin on the tow'rs they stand; and ev'n those few 
A feeble, fainting, and dejected crew. 
Yet in the face of danger some there stood: 
The two bold brothers of Sarpedon's blood, 
Asius and Acmon; both th' Assaraci; 
Young Haemon, and tho' young, resolv'd to die. 
With these were Clarus and Thymoetes join'd; 
Tibris and Castor, both of Lycian kind. 
From Acmon's hands a rolling stone there came, 
So large, it half deserv'd a mountain's name: 
Strong-sinew'd was the youth, and big of bone; 
His brother Mnestheus could not more have done, 
Or the great father of th' intrepid son. 
Some firebrands throw, some flights of arrows send; 
And some with darts, and some with stones defend. 
Amid the press appears the beauteous boy, 
The care of Venus, and the hope of Troy. 
His lovely face unarm'd, his head was bare; 
In ringlets o'er his shoulders hung his hair. 
His forehead circled with a diadem; 
Distinguish'd from the crowd, he shines a gem, 
Enchas'd in gold, or polish'd iv'ry set, 
Amidst the meaner foil of sable jet. 
Nor Ismarus was wanting to the war, 
Directing pointed arrows from afar, 
And death with poison arm'd- in Lydia born, 
Where plenteous harvests the fat fields adorn; 
Where proud Pactolus floats the fruitful lands, 
And leaves a rich manure of golden sands. 
There Capys, author of the Capuan name, 
And there was Mnestheus too, increas'd in fame, 
Since Turnus from the camp he cast with shame. 
Thus mortal war was wag'd on either side. 
Meantime the hero cuts the nightly tide: 
For, anxious, from Evander when he went, 
He sought the Tyrrhene camp, and Tarchon's tent; 
Expos'd the cause of coming to the chief; 
His name and country told, and ask'd relief; 
Propos'd the terms; his own small strength declar'd; 
What vengeance proud Mezentius had prepar'd: 
What Turnus, bold and violent, design'd; 
Then shew'd the slipp'ry state of humankind, 
And fickle fortune; warn'd him to beware, 
And to his wholesome counsel added pray'r. 
Tarchon, without delay, the treaty signs, 
And to the Trojan troops the Tuscan joins. 
They soon set sail; nor now the fates withstand; 
Their forces trusted with a foreign hand. 
Aeneas leads; upon his stern appear 
Two lions carv'd, which rising Ida bear- 
Ida, to wand'ring Trojans ever dear. 
Under their grateful shade Aeneas sate, 
Revolving war's events, and various fate. 
His left young Pallas kept, fix'd to his side, 
And oft of winds enquir'd, and of the tide; 
Oft of the stars, and of their wat'ry way; 
And what he suffer'd both by land and sea. 
Now, sacred sisters, open all your spring! 
The Tuscan leaders, and their army sing, 
Which follow'd great Aeneas to the war: 
Their arms, their numbers, and their names declare. 
A thousand youths brave Massicus obey, 
Borne in the Tiger thro' the foaming sea; 
From Asium brought, and Cosa, by his care: 
For arms, light quivers, bows and shafts, they bear. 
Fierce Abas next: his men bright armor wore; 
His stern Apollo's golden statue bore. 
Six hundred Populonia sent along, 
All skill'd in martial exercise, and strong. 
Three hundred more for battle Ilva joins, 
An isle renown'd for steel, and unexhausted mines. 
Asylas on his prow the third appears, 
Who heav'n interprets, and the wand'ring stars; 
From offer'd entrails prodigies expounds, 
And peals of thunder, with presaging sounds. 
A thousand spears in warlike order stand, 
Sent by the Pisans under his command. 
Fair Astur follows in the wat'ry field, 
Proud of his manag'd horse and painted shield. 
Gravisca, noisome from the neighb'ring fen, 
And his own Caere, sent three hundred men; 
With those which Minio's fields and Pyrgi gave, 
All bred in arms, unanimous, and brave. 
Thou, Muse, the name of Cinyras renew, 
And brave Cupavo follow'd but by few; 
Whose helm confess'd the lineage of the man, 
And bore, with wings display'd, a silver swan. 
Love was the fault of his fam'd ancestry, 
Whose forms and fortunes in his ensigns fly. 
For Cycnus lov'd unhappy Phaeton, 
And sung his loss in poplar groves, alone, 
Beneath the sister shades, to soothe his grief. 
Heav'n heard his song, and hasten'd his relief, 
And chang'd to snowy plumes his hoary hair, 
And wing'd his flight, to chant aloft in air. 
His son Cupavo brush'd the briny flood: 
Upon his stern a brawny Centaur stood, 
Who heav'd a rock, and, threat'ning still to throw, 
With lifted hands alarm'd the seas below: 
They seem'd to fear the formidable sight, 
And roll'd their billows on, to speed his flight. 
Ocnus was next, who led his native train 
Of hardy warriors thro' the wat'ry plain: 
The son of Manto by the Tuscan stream, 
From whence the Mantuan town derives the name- 
An ancient city, but of mix'd descent: 
Three sev'ral tribes compose the government; 
Four towns are under each; but all obey 
The Mantuan laws, and own the Tuscan sway. 
Hate to Mezentius arm'd five hundred more, 
Whom Mincius from his sire Benacus bore: 
Mincius, with wreaths of reeds his forehead cover'd o'er.

These grave Auletes leads: a hundred sweep 
With stretching oars at once the glassy deep. 
Him and his martial train the Triton bears; 
High on his poop the sea-green god appears: 
Frowning he seems his crooked shell to sound, 
And at the blast the billows dance around. 
A hairy man above the waist he shows; 
A porpoise tail beneath his belly grows; 
And ends a fish: his breast the waves divides, 
And froth and foam augment the murm'ring tides. 
Full thirty ships transport the chosen train 
For Troy's relief, and scour the briny main. 
Now was the world forsaken by the sun, 
And Phoebe half her nightly race had run. 
The careful chief, who never clos'd his eyes, 
Himself the rudder holds, the sails supplies. 
A choir of Nereids meet him on the flood, 
Once his own galleys, hewn from Ida's wood; 
But now, as many nymphs, the sea they sweep, 
As rode, before, tall vessels on the deep. 
They know him from afar; and in a ring 
Inclose the ship that bore the Trojan king. 
Cymodoce, whose voice excell'd the rest, 
Above the waves advanc'd her snowy breast; 
Her right hand stops the stern; her left divides 
The curling ocean, and corrects the tides. 
She spoke for all the choir, and thus began 
With pleasing words to warn th' unknowing man: 
"Sleeps our lov'd lord? O goddess-born, awake! 
Spread ev'ry sail, pursue your wat'ry track, 
And haste your course. Your navy once were we, 
From Ida's height descending to the sea; 
Till Turnus, as at anchor fix'd we stood, 
Presum'd to violate our holy wood. 
Then, loos'd from shore, we fled his fires profane 
(Unwillingly we broke our master's chain), 
And since have sought you thro' the Tuscan main. 
The mighty Mother chang'd our forms to these, 
And gave us life immortal in the seas. 
But young Ascanius, in his camp distress'd, 
By your insulting foes is hardly press'd. 
Th' Arcadian horsemen, and Etrurian host, 
Advance in order on the Latian coast: 
To cut their way the Daunian chief designs, 
Before their troops can reach the Trojan lines. 
Thou, when the rosy morn restores the light, 
First arm thy soldiers for th' ensuing fight: 
Thyself the fated sword of Vulcan wield, 
And bear aloft th' impenetrable shield. 
To-morrow's sun, unless my skill be vain, 
Shall see huge heaps of foes in battle slain." 
Parting, she spoke; and with immortal force 
Push'd on the vessel in her wat'ry course; 
For well she knew the way. Impell'd behind, 
The ship flew forward, and outstripp'd the wind. 
The rest make up. Unknowing of the cause, 
The chief admires their speed, and happy omens draws. 
Then thus he pray'd, and fix'd on heav'n his eyes: 
"Hear thou, great Mother of the deities. 
With turrets crown'd! (on Ida's holy hill 
Fierce tigers, rein'd and curb'd, obey thy will.) 
Firm thy own omens; lead us on to fight; 
And let thy Phrygians conquer in thy right." 
He said no more. And now renewing day 
Had chas'd the shadows of the night away. 
He charg'd the soldiers, with preventing care, 
Their flags to follow, and their arms prepare; 
Warn'd of th' ensuing fight, and bade 'em hope the war. 
Now, his lofty poop, he view'd below 
His camp incompass'd, and th' inclosing foe. 
His blazing shield, imbrac'd, he held on high; 
The camp receive the sign, and with loud shouts reply. 
Hope arms their courage: from their tow'rs they throw 
Their darts with double force, and drive the foe. 
Thus, at the signal giv'n, the cranes arise 
Before the stormy south, and blacken all the skies. 
King Turnus wonder'd at the fight renew'd, 
Till, looking back, the Trojan fleet he view'd, 
The seas with swelling canvas cover'd o'er, 
And the swift ships descending on the shore. 
The Latians saw from far, with dazzled eyes, 
The radiant crest that seem'd in flames to rise, 
And dart diffusive fires around the field, 
And the keen glitt'ring the golden shield. 
Thus threat'ning comets, when by night they rise, 
Shoot sanguine streams, and sadden all the skies: 
So Sirius, flashing forth sinister lights, 
Pale humankind with plagues and with dry famine fright: 
Yet Turnus with undaunted mind is bent 
To man the shores, and hinder their descent, 
And thus awakes the courage of his friends: 
"What you so long have wish'd, kind Fortune sends; 
In ardent arms to meet th' invading foe: 
You find, and find him at advantage now. 
Yours is the day: you need but only dare; 
Your swords will make you masters of the war. 
Your sires, your sons, your houses, and your lands, 
And dearest wifes, are all within your hands. 
Be mindful of the race from whence you came, 
And emulate in arms your fathers' fame. 
Now take the time, while stagg'ring yet they stand 
With feet unfirm, and prepossess the strand: 
Fortune befriends the bold." Nor more he said, 
But balanc'd whom to leave, and whom to lead; 
Then these elects, the landing to prevent; 
And those he leaves, to keep the city pent. 
Meantime the Trojan sends his troops ashore: 
Some are by boats expos'd, by bridges more. 
With lab'ring oars they bear along the strand, 
Where the tide languishes, and leap aland. 
Tarchon observes the coast with careful eyes, 
And, where no ford he finds, no water fries, 
Nor billows with unequal murmurs roar, 
But smoothly slide along, and swell the shore, 
That course he steer'd, and thus he gave command: 
"Here ply your oars, and at all hazard land: 
Force on the vessel, that her keel may wound 
This hated soil, and furrow hostile ground. 
Let me securely land- I ask no more; 
Then sink my ships, or shatter on the shore." 
This fiery speech inflames his fearful friends: 
They tug at ev'ry oar, and ev'ry stretcher bends; 
They run their ships aground; the vessels knock, 
(Thus forc'd ashore,) and tremble with the shock. 
Tarchon's alone was lost, that stranded stood, 
Stuck on a bank, and beaten by the flood: 
She breaks her back; the loosen'd sides give way, 
And plunge the Tuscan soldiers in the sea. 
Their broken oars and floating planks withstand 
Their passage, while they labor to the land, 
And ebbing tides bear back upon th' uncertain sand. 
Now Turnus leads his troops without delay, 
Advancing to the margin of the sea. 
The trumpets sound: Aeneas first assail'd 
The clowns new-rais'd and raw, and soon prevail'd. 
Great Theron fell, an omen of the fight; 
Great Theron, large of limbs, of giant height. 
He first in open field defied the prince: 
But armor scal'd with gold was no defense 
Against the fated sword, which open'd wide 
His plated shield, and pierc'd his naked side. 
Next, Lichas fell, who, not like others born, 
Was from his wretched mother ripp'd and torn; 
Sacred, O Phoebus, from his birth to thee; 
For his beginning life from biting steel was free. 
Not far from him was Gyas laid along, 
Of monstrous bulk; with Cisseus fierce and strong: 
Vain bulk and strength! for, when the chief assail'd, 
Nor valor nor Herculean arms avail'd, 
Nor their fam'd father, wont in war to go 
With great Alcides, while he toil'd below. 
The noisy Pharos next receiv'd his death: 
Aeneas writh'd his dart, and stopp'd his bawling breath.

Then wretched Cydon had receiv'd his doom, 
Who courted Clytius in his beardless bloom, 
And sought with lust obscene polluted joys: 
The Trojan sword had curd his love of boys, 
Had not his sev'n bold brethren stopp'd the course 
Of the fierce champions, with united force. 
Sev'n darts were thrown at once; and some rebound 
From his bright shield, some on his helmet sound: 
The rest had reach'd him; but his mother's care 
Prevented those, and turn'd aside in air. 
The prince then call'd Achates, to supply 
The spears that knew the way to victory- 
"Those fatal weapons, which, inur'd to blood, 
In Grecian bodies under Ilium stood: 
Not one of those my hand shall toss in vain 
Against our foes, on this contended plain." 
He said; then seiz'd a mighty spear, and threw; 
Which, wing'd with fate, thro' Maeon's buckler flew, 
Pierc'd all the brazen plates, and reach'd his heart: 
He stagger'd with intolerable smart. 
Alcanor saw; and reach'd, but reach'd in vain, 
His helping hand, his brother to sustain. 
A second spear, which kept the former course, 
From the same hand, and sent with equal force, 
His right arm pierc'd, and holding on, bereft 
His use of both, and pinion'd down his left. 
Then Numitor from his dead brother drew 
Th' ill-omen'd spear, and at the Trojan threw: 
Preventing fate directs the lance awry, 
Which, glancing, only mark'd Achates' thigh. 
In pride of youth the Sabine Clausus came, 
And, from afar, at Dryops took his aim. 
The spear flew hissing thro' the middle space, 
And pierc'd his throat, directed at his face; 
It stopp'd at once the passage of his wind, 
And the free soul to flitting air resign'd: 
His forehead was the first that struck the ground; 
Lifeblood and life rush'd mingled thro' the wound. 
He slew three brothers of the Borean race, 
And three, whom Ismarus, their native place, 
Had sent to war, but all the sons of Thrace. 
Halesus, next, the bold Aurunci leads: 
The son of Neptune to his aid succeeds, 
Conspicuous on his horse. On either hand, 
These fight to keep, and those to win, the land. 
With mutual blood th' Ausonian soil is dyed, 
While on its borders each their claim decide. 
As wintry winds, contending in the sky, 
With equal force of lungs their titles try: 
They rage, they roar; the doubtful rack of heav'n 
Stands without motion, and the tide undriv'n: 
Each bent to conquer, neither side to yield, 
They long suspend the fortune of the field. 
Both armies thus perform what courage can; 
Foot set to foot, and mingled man to man. 
But, in another part, th' Arcadian horse 
With ill success ingage the Latin force: 
For, where th' impetuous torrent, rushing down, 
Huge craggy stones and rooted trees had thrown, 
They left their coursers, and, unus'd to fight 
On foot, were scatter'd in a shameful flight. 
Pallas, who with disdain and grief had view'd 
His foes pursuing, and his friends pursued, 
Us'd threat'nings mix'd with pray'rs, his last resource,

With these to move their minds, with those to fire their force

"Which way, companions? whether would you run? 
By you yourselves, and mighty battles won, 
By my great sire, by his establish'd name, 
And early promise of my future fame; 
By my youth, emulous of equal right 
To share his honors- shun ignoble flight! 
Trust not your feet: your hands must hew way 
Thro' yon black body, and that thick array: 
'T is thro' that forward path that we must come; 
There lies our way, and that our passage home. 
Nor pow'rs above, nor destinies below 
Oppress our arms: with equal strength we go, 
With mortal hands to meet a mortal foe. 
See on what foot we stand: a scanty shore, 
The sea behind, our enemies before; 
No passage left, unless we swim the main; 
Or, forcing these, the Trojan trenches gain." 
This said, he strode with eager haste along, 
And bore amidst the thickest of the throng. 
Lagus, the first he met, with fate to foe, 
Had heav'd a stone of mighty weight, to throw: 
Stooping, the spear descended on his chine, 
Just where the bone distinguished either loin: 
It stuck so fast, so deeply buried lay, 
That scarce the victor forc'd the steel away. 
Hisbon came on: but, while he mov'd too slow 
To wish'd revenge, the prince prevents his blow; 
For, warding his at once, at once he press'd, 
And plung'd the fatal weapon in his breast. 
Then lewd Anchemolus he laid in dust, 
Who stain'd his stepdam's bed with impious lust. 
And, after him, the Daucian twins were slain, 
Laris and Thymbrus, on the Latian plain; 
So wondrous like in feature, shape, and size, 
As caus'd an error in their parents' eyes- 
Grateful mistake! but soon the sword decides 
The nice distinction, and their fate divides: 
For Thymbrus' head was lopp'd; and Laris' hand, 
Dismember'd, sought its owner on the strand: 
The trembling fingers yet the fauchion strain, 
And threaten still th' intended stroke in vain. 
Now, to renew the charge, th' Arcadians came: 
Sight of such acts, and sense of honest shame, 
And grief, with anger mix'd, their minds inflame. 
Then, with a casual blow was Rhoeteus slain, 
Who chanc'd, as Pallas threw, to cross the plain: 
The flying spear was after Ilus sent; 
But Rhoeteus happen'd on a death unmeant: 
From Teuthras and from Tyres while he fled, 
The lance, athwart his body, laid him dead: 
Roll'd from his chariot with a mortal wound, 
And intercepted fate, he spurn'd the ground. 
As when, in summer, welcome winds arise, 
The watchful shepherd to the forest flies, 
And fires the midmost plants; contagion spreads, 
And catching flames infect the neighb'ring heads; 
Around the forest flies the furious blast, 
And all the leafy nation sinks at last, 
And Vulcan rides in triumph o'er the waste; 
The pastor, pleas'd with his dire victory, 
Beholds the satiate flames in sheets ascend the sky: 
So Pallas' troops their scatter'd strength unite, 
And, pouring on their foes, their prince delight. 
Halesus came, fierce with desire of blood; 
But first collected in his arms he stood: 
Advancing then, he plied the spear so well, 
Ladon, Demodocus, and Pheres fell. 
Around his head he toss'd his glitt'ring brand, 
And from Strymonius hew'd his better hand, 
Held up to guard his throat; then hurl'd a stone 
At Thoas' ample front, and pierc'd the bone: 
It struck beneath the space of either eye; 
And blood, and mingled brains, together fly. 
Deep skill'd in future fates, Halesus' sire 
Did with the youth to lonely groves retire: 
But, when the father's mortal race was run, 
Dire destiny laid hold upon the son, 
And haul'd him to the war, to find, beneath 
Th' Evandrian spear, a memorable death. 
Pallas th' encounter seeks, but, ere he throws, 
To Tuscan Tiber thus address'd his vows: 
"O sacred stream, direct my flying dart, 
And give to pass the proud Halesus' heart! 
His arms and spoils thy holy oak shall bear." 
Pleas'd with the bribe, the god receiv'd his pray'r: 
For, while his shield protects a friend distress'd, 
The dart came driving on, and pierc'd his breast. 
But Lausus, no small portion of the war, 
Permits not panic fear to reign too far, 
Caus'd by the death of so renown'd a knight; 
But by his own example cheers the fight. 
Fierce Abas first he slew; Abas, the stay 
Of Trojan hopes, and hindrance of the day. 
The Phrygian troops escap'd the Greeks in vain: 
They, and their mix'd allies, now load the plain. 
To the rude shock of war both armies came; 
Their leaders equal, and their strength the same. 
The rear so press'd the front, they could not wield 
Their angry weapons, to dispute the field. 
Here Pallas urges on, and Lausus there: 
Of equal youth and beauty both appear, 
But both by fate forbid to breathe their native air. 
Their congress in the field great Jove withstands: 
Both doom'd to fall, but fall by greater hands. 
Meantime Juturna warns the Daunian chief 
Of Lausus' danger, urging swift relief. 
With his driv'n chariot he divides the crowd, 
And, making to his friends, thus calls aloud: 
"Let none presume his needless aid to join; 
Retire, and clear the field; the fight is mine: 
To this right hand is Pallas only due; 
O were his father here, my just revenge to view!" 
From the forbidden space his men retir'd. 
Pallas their awe, and his stern words, admir'd; 
Survey'd him o'er and o'er with wond'ring sight, 
Struck with his haughty mien, and tow'ring height. 
Then to the king: "Your empty vaunts forbear; 
Success I hope, and fate I cannot fear; 
Alive or dead, I shall deserve a name; 
Jove is impartial, and to both the same." 
He said, and to the void advanc'd his pace: 
Pale horror sate on each Arcadian face. 
Then Turnus, from his chariot leaping light, 
Address'd himself on foot to single fight. 
And, as a lion- when he spies from far 
A bull that seems to meditate the war, 
Bending his neck, and spurning back the sand- 
Runs roaring downward from his hilly stand: 
Imagine eager Turnus not more slow, 
To rush from high on his unequal foe. 
Young Pallas, when he saw the chief advance 
Within due distance of his flying lance, 
Prepares to charge him first, resolv'd to try 
If fortune would his want of force supply; 
And thus to Heav'n and Hercules address'd: 
"Alcides, once on earth Evander's guest, 
His son adjures you by those holy rites, 
That hospitable board, those genial nights; 
Assist my great attempt to gain this prize, 
And let proud Turnus view, with dying eyes, 
His ravish'd spoils." 'T was heard, the vain request; 
Alcides mourn'd, and stifled sighs within his breast. 
Then Jove, to soothe his sorrow, thus began: 
"Short bounds of life are set to mortal man. 
'T is virtue's work alone to stretch the narrow span. 
So many sons of gods, in bloody fight, 
Around the walls of Troy, have lost the light: 
My own Sarpedon fell beneath his foe; 
Nor I, his mighty sire, could ward the blow. 
Ev'n Turnus shortly shall resign his breath, 
And stands already on the verge of death." 
This said, the god permits the fatal fight, 
But from the Latian fields averts his sight. 
Now with full force his spear young Pallas threw, 
And, having thrown, his shining fauchion drew 
The steel just graz'd along the shoulder joint, 
And mark'd it slightly with the glancing point, 
Fierce Turnus first to nearer distance drew, 
And pois'd his pointed spear, before he threw: 
Then, as the winged weapon whizz'd along, 
"See now," said he, "whose arm is better strung." 
The spear kept on the fatal course, unstay'd 
By plates of ir'n, which o'er the shield were laid: 
Thro' folded brass and tough bull hides it pass'd, 
His corslet pierc'd, and reach'd his heart at last. 
In vain the youth tugs at the broken wood; 
The soul comes issuing with the vital blood: 
He falls; his arms upon his body sound; 
And with his bloody teeth he bites the ground. 
Turnus bestrode the corpse: "Arcadians, hear," 
Said he; "my message to your master bear: 
Such as the sire deserv'd, the son I send; 
It costs him dear to be the Phrygians' friend. 
The lifeless body, tell him, I bestow, 
Unask'd, to rest his wand'ring ghost below." 
He said, and trampled down with all the force 
Of his left foot, and spurn'd the wretched corse; 
Then snatch'd the shining belt, with gold inlaid; 
The belt Eurytion's artful hands had made, 
Where fifty fatal brides, express'd to sight, 
All in the compass of one mournful night, 
Depriv'd their bridegrooms of returning light. 
In an ill hour insulting Turnus tore 
Those golden spoils, and in a worse he wore. 
O mortals, blind in fate, who never know 
To bear high fortune, or endure the low! 
The time shall come, when Turnus, but in vain, 
Shall wish untouch'd the trophies of the slain; 
Shall wish the fatal belt were far away, 
And curse the dire remembrance of the day. 
The sad Arcadians, from th' unhappy field, 
Bear back the breathless body on a shield. 
O grace and grief of war! at once restor'd, 
With praises, to thy sire, at once deplor'd! 
One day first sent thee to the fighting field, 
Beheld whole heaps of foes in battle kill'd; 
One day beheld thee dead, and borne upon thy shield. 
This dismal news, not from uncertain fame, 
But sad spectators, to the hero came: 
His friends upon the brink of ruin stand, 
Unless reliev'd by his victorious hand. 
He whirls his sword around, without delay, 
And hews thro' adverse foes an ample way, 
To find fierce Turnus, of his conquest proud: 
Evander, Pallas, all that friendship ow'd 
To large deserts, are present to his eyes; 
His plighted hand, and hospitable ties. 
Four sons of Sulmo, four whom Ufens bred, 
He took in fight, and living victims led, 
To please the ghost of Pallas, and expire, 
In sacrifice, before his fun'ral fire. 
At Magus next he threw: he stoop'd below 
The flying spear, and shunn'd the promis'd blow; 
Then, creeping, clasp'd the hero's knees, and pray'd: 
"By young Iulus, by thy father's shade, 
O spare my life, and send me back to see 
My longing sire, and tender progeny! 
A lofty house I have, and wealth untold, 
In silver ingots, and in bars of gold: 
All these, and sums besides, which see no day, 
The ransom of this one poor life shall pay. 
If I survive, will Troy the less prevail? 
A single soul's too light to turn the scale." 
He said. The hero sternly thus replied: 
"Thy bars and ingots, and the sums beside, 
Leave for thy children's lot. Thy Turnus broke 
All rules of war by one relentless stroke, 
When Pallas fell: so deems, nor deems alone 
My father's shadow, but my living son." 
Thus having said, of kind remorse bereft, 
He seiz'd his helm, and dragg'd him with his left; 
Then with his right hand, while his neck he wreath'd, 
Up to the hilts his shining fauchion sheath'd. 
Apollo's priest, Emonides, was near; 
His holy fillets on his front appear; 
Glitt'ring in arms, he shone amidst the crowd; 
Much of his god, more of his purple, proud. 
Him the fierce Trojan follow'd thro' the field: 
The holy coward fell; and, forc'd to yield, 
The prince stood o'er the priest, and, at one blow, 
Sent him an off'ring to the shades below. 
His arms Seresthus on his shoulders bears, 
Design'd a trophy to the God of Wars. 
Vulcanian Caeculus renews the fight, 
And Umbro, born upon the mountains' height. 
The champion cheers his troops t' encounter those, 
And seeks revenge himself on other foes. 
At Anxur's shield he drove; and, at the blow, 
Both shield and arm to ground together go. 
Anxur had boasted much of magic charms, 
And thought he wore impenetrable arms, 
So made by mutter'd spells; and, from the spheres, 
Had life secur'd, in vain, for length of years. 
Then Tarquitus the field triumph trod; 
A nymph his mother, his sire a god. 
Exulting in bright arms, he braves the prince: 
With his protended lance he makes defense; 
Bears back his feeble foe; then, pressing on, 
Arrests his better hand, and drags him down; 
Stands o'er the prostrate wretch, and, as he lay, 
Vain tales inventing, and prepar'd to pray, 
Mows off his head: the trunk a moment stood, 
Then sunk, and roll'd along the sand in blood. 
The vengeful victor thus upbraids the slain: 
"Lie there, proud man, unpitied, on the plain; 
Lie there, inglorious, and without a tomb, 
Far from thy mother and thy native home, 
Exposed to savage beasts, and birds of prey, 
Or thrown for food to monsters of the sea." 
On Lycas and Antaeus next he ran, 
Two chiefs of Turnus, and who led his van. 
They fled for fear; with these, he chas'd along 
Camers the yellow-lock'd, and Numa strong; 
Both great in arms, and both were fair and young. 
Camers was son to Volscens lately slain, 
In wealth surpassing all the Latian train, 
And in Amycla fix'd his silent easy reign. 
And, as Aegaeon, when with heav'n he strove, 
Stood opposite in arms to mighty Jove; 
Mov'd all his hundred hands, provok'd the war, 
Defied the forky lightning from afar; 
At fifty mouths his flaming breath expires, 
And flash for flash returns, and fires for fires; 
In his right hand as many swords he wields, 
And takes the thunder on as many shields: 
With strength like his, the Trojan hero stood; 
And soon the fields with falling corps were strow'd, 
When once his fauchion found the taste of blood. 
With fury scarce to be conceiv'd, he flew 
Against Niphaeus, whom four coursers drew. 
They, when they see the fiery chief advance, 
And pushing at their chests his pointed lance, 
Wheel'd with so swift a motion, mad with fear, 
They threw their master headlong from the chair. 
They stare, they start, nor stop their course, before 
They bear the bounding chariot to the shore. 
Now Lucagus and Liger scour the plains, 
With two white steeds; but Liger holds the reins, 
And Lucagus the lofty seat maintains: 
Bold brethren both. The former wav'd in air 
His flaming sword: Aeneas couch'd his spear, 
Unus'd to threats, and more unus'd to fear. 
Then Liger thus: "Thy confidence is vain 
To scape from hence, as from the Trojan plain: 
Nor these the steeds which Diomede bestrode, 
Nor this the chariot where Achilles rode; 
Nor Venus' veil is here, near Neptune's shield; 
Thy fatal hour is come, and this the field." 
Thus Liger vainly vaunts: the Trojan 
Return'd his answer with his flying spear. 
As Lucagus, to lash his horses, bends, 
Prone to the wheels, and his left foot protends, 
Prepar'd for fight; the fatal dart arrives, 
And thro' the borders of his buckler drives; 
Pass'd thro' and pierc'd his groin: the deadly wound, 
Cast from his chariot, roll'd him on the ground. 
Whom thus the chief upbraids with scornful spite: 
"Blame not the slowness of your steeds in flight; 
Vain shadows did not force their swift retreat; 
But you yourself forsake your empty seat." 
He said, and seiz'd at once the loosen'd rein; 
For Liger lay already on the plain, 
By the same shock: then, stretching out his hands, 
The recreant thus his wretched life demands: 
"Now, by thyself, O more than mortal man! 
By her and him from whom thy breath began, 
Who form'd thee thus divine, I beg thee, spare 
This forfeit life, and hear thy suppliant's pray'r." 
Thus much he spoke, and more he would have said; 
But the stern hero turn'd aside his head, 
And cut him short: "I hear another man; 
You talk'd not thus before the fight began. 
Now take your turn; and, as a brother should, 
Attend your brother to the Stygian flood." 
Then thro' his breast his fatal sword he sent, 
And the soul issued at the gaping vent. 
As storms the skies, and torrents tear the ground, 
Thus rag'd the prince, and scatter'd deaths around. 
At length Ascanius and the Trojan train 
Broke from the camp, so long besieg'd in vain. 
Meantime the King of Gods and Mortal Man 
Held conference with his queen, and thus began: 
"My sister goddess, and well-pleasing wife, 
Still think you Venus' aid supports the strife- 
Sustains her Trojans- or themselves, alone, 
With inborn valor force their fortune on? 
How fierce in fight, with courage undecay'd! 
Judge if such warriors want immortal aid." 
To whom the goddess with the charming eyes, 
Soft in her tone, submissively replies: 
"Why, O my sov'reign lord, whose frown I fear, 
And cannot, unconcern'd, your anger bear; 
Why urge you thus my grief? when, if I still 
(As once I was) were mistress of your will, 
From your almighty pow'r your pleasing wife 
Might gain the grace of length'ning Turnus' life, 
Securely snatch him from the fatal fight, 
And give him to his aged father's sight. 
Now let him perish, since you hold it good, 
And glut the Trojans with his pious blood. 
Yet from our lineage he derives his name, 
And, in the fourth degree, from god Pilumnus came; 
Yet he devoutly pays you rites divine, 
And offers daily incense at your shrine." 
Then shortly thus the sov'reign god replied: 
"Since in my pow'r and goodness you confide, 
If for a little space, a lengthen'd span, 
You beg reprieve for this expiring man, 
I grant you leave to take your Turnus hence 
From instant fate, and can so far dispense. 
But, if some secret meaning lies beneath, 
To save the short-liv'd youth from destin'd death, 
Or if a farther thought you entertain, 
To change the fates; you feed your hopes in vain." 
To whom the goddess thus, with weeping eyes: 
"And what if that request, your tongue denies, 
Your heart should grant; and not a short reprieve, 
But length of certain life, to Turnus give? 
Now speedy death attends the guiltless youth, 
If my presaging soul divines with truth; 
Which, O! I wish, might err thro' causeless fears, 
And you (for you have pow'r) prolong his years!" 
Thus having said, involv'd in clouds, she flies, 
And drives a storm before her thro' the skies. 
Swift she descends, alighting on the plain, 
Where the fierce foes a dubious fight maintain. 
Of air condens'd a specter soon she made; 
And, what Aeneas was, such seem'd the shade. 
Adorn'd with Dardan arms, the phantom bore 
His head aloft; a plumy crest he wore; 
This hand appear'd a shining sword to wield,. 
And that sustain'd an imitated shield. 
With manly mien he stalk'd along the ground, 
Nor wanted voice belied, nor vaunting sound. 
(Thus haunting ghosts appear to waking sight, 
Or dreadful visions in our dreams by night.) 
The specter seems the Daunian chief to dare, 
And flourishes his empty sword in air. 
At this, advancing, Turnus hurl'd his spear: 
The phantom wheel'd, and seem'd to fly for fear. 
Deluded Turnus thought the Trojan fled, 
And with vain hopes his haughty fancy fed. 
"Whether, O coward?" (thus he calls aloud, 
Nor found he spoke to wind, and chas'd a cloud,) 
"Why thus forsake your bride! Receive from me 
The fated land you sought so long by sea." 
He said, and, brandishing at once his blade, 
With eager pace pursued the flying shade. 
By chance a ship was fasten'd to the shore, 
Which from old Clusium King Osinius bore: 
The plank was ready laid for safe ascent; 
For shelter there the trembling shadow bent, 
And skipp't and skulk'd, and under hatches went. 
Exulting Turnus, with regardless haste, 
Ascends the plank, and to the galley pass'd. 
Scarce had he reach'd the prow: Saturnia's hand 
The haulsers cuts, and shoots the ship from land. 
With wind in poop, the vessel plows the sea, 
And measures back with speed her former way. 
Meantime Aeneas seeks his absent foe, 
And sends his slaughter'd troops to shades below. 
The guileful phantom now forsook the shroud, 
And flew sublime, and vanish'd in a cloud. 
Too late young Turnus the delusion found, 
Far on the sea, still making from the ground. 
Then, thankless for a life redeem'd by shame, 
With sense of honor stung, and forfeit fame, 
Fearful besides of what in fight had pass'd, 
His hands and haggard eyes to heav'n he cast; 
"O Jove!" he cried, "for what offense have 
Deserv'd to bear this endless infamy? 
Whence am I forc'd, and whether am I borne? 
How, and with what reproach, shall I return? 
Shall ever I behold the Latian plain, 
Or see Laurentum's lofty tow'rs again? 
What will they say of their deserting chief 
The war was mine: I fly from their relief; 
I led to slaughter, and in slaughter leave; 
And ev'n from hence their dying groans receive. 
Here, overmatch'd in fight, in heaps they lie; 
There, scatter'd o'er the fields, ignobly fly. 
Gape wide, O earth, and draw me down alive! 
Or, O ye pitying winds, a wretch relieve! 
On sands or shelves the splitting vessel drive; 
Or set me shipwrack'd on some desart shore, 
Where no Rutulian eyes may see me more, 
Unknown to friends, or foes, or conscious Fame, 
Lest she should follow, and my flight proclaim." 
Thus Turnus rav'd, and various fates revolv'd: 
The choice was doubtful, but the death resolv'd. 
And now the sword, and now the sea took place, 
That to revenge, and this to purge disgrace. 
Sometimes he thought to swim the stormy main, 
By stretch of arms the distant shore to gain. 
Thrice he the sword assay'd, and thrice the flood; 
But Juno, mov'd with pity, both withstood. 
And thrice repress'd his rage; strong gales supplied, 
And push'd the vessel o'er the swelling tide. 
At length she lands him on his native shores, 
And to his father's longing arms restores. 
Meantime, by Jove's impulse, Mezentius arm'd, 
Succeeding Turnus, with his ardor warm'd 
His fainting friends, reproach'd their shameful flight, 
Repell'd the victors, and renew'd the fight. 
Against their king the Tuscan troops conspire; 
Such is their hate, and such their fierce desire 
Of wish'd revenge: on him, and him alone, 
All hands employ'd, and all their darts are thrown. 
He, like a solid rock by seas inclos'd, 
To raging winds and roaring waves oppos'd, 
From his proud summit looking down, disdains 
Their empty menace, and unmov'd remains. 
Beneath his feet fell haughty Hebrus dead, 
Then Latagus, and Palmus as he fled. 
At Latagus a weighty stone he flung: 
His face was flatted, and his helmet rung. 
But Palmus from behind receives his wound; 
Hamstring'd he falls, and grovels on the ground: 
His crest and armor, from his body torn, 
Thy shoulders, Lausus, and thy head adorn. 
Evas and Mimas, both of Troy, he slew. 
Mimas his birth from fair Theano drew, 
Born on that fatal night, when, big with fire, 
The queen produc'd young Paris to his sire: 
But Paris in the Phrygian fields was slain, 
Unthinking Mimas on the Latian plain. 
And, as a savage boar, on mountains bred, 
With forest mast and fatt'ning marshes fed, 
When once he sees himself in toils inclos'd, 
By huntsmen and their eager hounds oppos'd- 
He whets his tusks, and turns, and dares the war; 
Th' invaders dart their jav'lins from afar: 
All keep aloof, and safely shout around; 
But none presumes to give a nearer wound: 
He frets and froths, erects his bristled hide, 
And shakes a grove of lances from his side: 
Not otherwise the troops, with hate inspir'd, 
And just revenge against the tyrant fir'd, 
Their darts with clamor at a distance drive, 
And only keep the languish'd war alive. 
From Coritus came Acron to the fight, 
Who left his spouse betroth'd, and unconsummate night. 
Mezentius sees him thro' the squadrons ride, 
Proud of the purple favors of his bride. 
Then, as a hungry lion, who beholds 
A gamesome goat, who frisks about the folds, 
Or beamy stag, that grazes on the plain- 
He runs, he roars, he shakes his rising mane, 
He grins, and opens wide his greedy jaws; 
The prey lies panting underneath his paws: 
He fills his famish'd maw; his mouth runs o'er 
With unchew'd morsels, while he churns the gore: 
So proud Mezentius rushes on his foes, 
And first unhappy Acron overthrows: 
Stretch'd at his length, he spurns the swarthy ground; 
The lance, besmear'd with blood, lies broken in the wound.

Then with disdain the haughty victor view'd 
Orodes flying, nor the wretch pursued, 
Nor thought the dastard's back deserv'd a wound, 
But, running, gain'd th' advantage of the ground: 
Then turning short, he met him face to face, 
To give his victor the better grace. 
Orodes falls, equal fight oppress'd: 
Mezentius fix'd his foot upon his breast, 
And rested lance; and thus aloud he cries: 
"Lo! here the champion of my rebels lies!" 
The fields around with Io Paean! ring; 
And peals of shouts applaud the conqu'ring king. 
At this the vanquish'd, with his dying breath, 
Thus faintly spoke, and prophesied in death: 
"Nor thou, proud man, unpunish'd shalt remain: 
Like death attends thee on this fatal plain." 
Then, sourly smiling, thus the king replied: 
"For what belongs to me, let Jove provide; 
But die thou first, whatever chance ensue." 
He said, and from the wound the weapon drew. 
A hov'ring mist came swimming o'er his sight, 
And seal'd his eyes in everlasting night. 
By Caedicus, Alcathous was slain; 
Sacrator laid Hydaspes on the plain; 
Orses the strong to greater strength must yield; 
He, with Parthenius, were by Rapo kill'd. 
Then brave Messapus Ericetes slew, 
Who from Lycaon's blood his lineage drew. 
But from his headstrong horse his fate he found, 
Who threw his master, as he made a bound: 
The chief, alighting, stuck him to the ground; 
Then Clonius, hand to hand, on foot assails: 
The Trojan sinks, and Neptune's son prevails. 
Agis the Lycian, stepping forth with pride, 
To single fight the boldest foe defied; 
Whom Tuscan Valerus by force o'ercame, 
And not belied his mighty father's fame. 
Salius to death the great Antronius sent: 
But the same fate the victor underwent, 
Slain by Nealces' hand, well-skill'd to throw 
The flying dart, and draw the far-deceiving bow. 
Thus equal deaths are dealt with equal chance; 
By turns they quit their ground, by turns advance: 
Victors and vanquish'd, in the various field, 
Nor wholly overcome, nor wholly yield. 
The gods from heav'n survey the fatal strife, 
And mourn the miseries of human life. 
Above the rest, two goddesses appear 
Concern'd for each: here Venus, Juno there. 
Amidst the crowd, infernal Ate shakes 
Her scourge aloft, and crest of hissing snakes. 
Once more the proud Mezentius, with disdain, 
Brandish'd his spear, and rush'd into the plain, 
Where tow'ring in the midmost rank she stood, 
Like tall Orion stalking o'er the flood. 
(When with his brawny breast he cuts the waves, 
His shoulders scarce the topmost billow laves), 
Or like a mountain ash, whose roots are spread, 
Deep fix'd in earth; in clouds he hides his head. 
The Trojan prince beheld him from afar, 
And dauntless undertook the doubtful war. 
Collected in his strength, and like a rock, 
Pois'd on his base, Mezentius stood the shock. 
He stood, and, measuring first with careful eyes 
The space his spear could reach, aloud he cries: 
"My strong right hand, and sword, assist my stroke! 
(Those only gods Mezentius will invoke.) 
His armor, from the Trojan pirate torn, 
By my triumphant Lausus shall be worn." 
He said; and with his utmost force he threw 
The massy spear, which, hissing as it flew, 
Reach'd the celestial shield, that stopp'd the course; 
But, glancing thence, the yet unbroken force 
Took a new bent obliquely, and betwixt 
The side and bowels fam'd Anthores fix'd. 
Anthores had from Argos travel'd far, 
Alcides' friend, and brother of the war; 
Till, tir'd with toils, fair Italy he chose, 
And in Evander's palace sought repose. 
Now, falling by another's wound, his eyes 
He cast to heav'n, on Argos thinks, and dies. 
The pious Trojan then his jav'lin sent; 
The shield gave way; thro' treble plates it went 
Of solid brass, of linen trebly roll'd, 
And three bull hides which round the buckler fold. 
All these it pass'd, resistless in the course, 
Transpierc'd his thigh, and spent its dying force. 
The gaping wound gush'd out a crimson flood. 
The Trojan, glad with sight of hostile blood, 
His faunchion drew, to closer fight address'd, 
And with new force his fainting foe oppress'd. 
His father's peril Lausus view'd with grief; 
He sigh'd, he wept, he ran to his relief. 
And here, heroic youth, 't is here I must 
To thy immortal memory be just, 
And sing an act so noble and so new, 
Posterity will scarce believe 't is true. 
Pain'd with his wound, and useless for the fight, 
The father sought to save himself by flight: 
Incumber'd, slow he dragg'd the spear along, 
Which pierc'd his thigh, and in his buckler hung. 
The pious youth, resolv'd on death, below 
The lifted sword springs forth to face the foe; 
Protects his parent, and prevents the blow. 
Shouts of applause ran ringing thro' the field, 
To see the son the vanquish'd father shield. 
All, fir'd with gen'rous indignation, strive, 
And with a storm of darts to distance drive 
The Trojan chief, who, held at bay from far, 
On his Vulcanian orb sustain'd the war. 
As, when thick hail comes rattling in the wind, 
The plowman, passenger, and lab'ring hind 
For shelter to the neighb'ring covert fly, 
Or hous'd, or safe in hollow caverns lie; 
But, that o'erblown, when heav'n above 'em smiles, 
Return to travel, and renew their toils: 
Aeneas thus, o'erwhelmed on ev'ry side, 
The storm of darts, undaunted, did abide; 
And thus to Lausus loud with friendly threat'ning cried:

"Why wilt thou rush to certain death, and rage 
In rash attempts, beyond thy tender age, 
Betray'd by pious love?" Nor, thus forborne, 
The youth desists, but with insulting scorn 
Provokes the ling'ring prince, whose patience, tir'd, 
Gave place; and all his breast with fury fir'd. 
For now the Fates prepar'd their sharpen'd shears; 
And lifted high the flaming sword appears, 
Which, full descending with a frightful sway, 
Thro' shield and corslet forc'd th' impetuous way, 
And buried deep in his fair bosom lay. 
The purple streams thro' the thin armor strove, 
And drench'd th' imbroider'd coat his mother wove; 
And life at length forsook his heaving heart, 
Loth from so sweet a mansion to depart. 
But when, with blood and paleness all o'erspread, 
The pious prince beheld young Lausus dead, 
He griev'd; he wept; the sight an image brought 
Of his own filial love, a sadly pleasing thought: 
Then stretch'd his hand to hold him up, and said: 
"Poor hapless youth! what praises can be paid 
To love so great, to such transcendent store 
Of early worth, and sure presage of more? 
Accept whate'er Aeneas can afford; 
Untouch'd thy arms, untaken be thy sword; 
And all that pleas'd thee living, still remain 
Inviolate, and sacred to the slain. 
Thy body on thy parents I bestow, 
To rest thy soul, at least, if shadows know, 
Or have a sense of human things below. 
There to thy fellow ghosts with glory tell: 
''T was by the great Aeneas hand I fell.'" 
With this, his distant friends he beckons near, 
Provokes their duty, and prevents their fear: 
Himself assists to lift him from the ground, 
With clotted locks, and blood that well'd from out the wound.

Meantime, his father, now no father, stood, 
And wash'd his wounds by Tiber's yellow flood: 
Oppress'd with anguish, panting, and o'erspent, 
His fainting limbs against an oak he leant. 
A bough his brazen helmet did sustain; 
His heavier arms lay scatter'd on the plain: 
A chosen train of youth around him stand; 
His drooping head was rested on his hand: 
His grisly beard his pensive bosom sought; 
And all on Lausus ran his restless thought. 
Careful, concern'd his danger to prevent, 
He much enquir'd, and many a message sent 
To warn him from the field- alas! in vain! 
Behold, his mournful followers bear him slain! 
O'er his broad shield still gush'd the yawning wound, 
And drew a bloody trail along the ground. 
Far off he heard their cries, far off divin'd 
The dire event, with a foreboding mind. 
With dust he sprinkled first his hoary head; 
Then both his lifted hands to heav'n he spread; 
Last, the dear corpse embracing, thus he said: 
"What joys, alas! could this frail being give, 
That I have been so covetous to live? 
To see my son, and such a son, resign 
His life, a ransom for preserving mine! 
And am I then preserv'd, and art thou lost? 
How much too dear has that redemption cost! 
'T is now my bitter banishment I feel: 
This is a wound too deep for time to heal. 
My guilt thy growing virtues did defame; 
My blackness blotted thy unblemish'd name. 
Chas'd from a throne, abandon'd, and exil'd 
For foul misdeeds, were punishments too mild: 
I ow'd my people these, and, from their hate, 
With less resentment could have borne my fate. 
And yet I live, and yet sustain the sight 
Of hated men, and of more hated light: 
But will not long." With that he rais'd from ground 
His fainting limbs, that stagger'd with his wound; 
Yet, with a mind resolv'd, and unappall'd 
With pains or perils, for his courser call'd 
Well-mouth'd, well-manag'd, whom himself did dress 
With daily care, and mounted with success; 
His aid in arms, his ornament in peace. 
Soothing his courage with a gentle stroke, 
The steed seem'd sensible, while thus he spoke: 
"O Rhoebus, we have liv'd too long for me- 
If life and long were terms that could agree! 
This day thou either shalt bring back the head 
And bloody trophies of the Trojan dead; 
This day thou either shalt revenge my woe, 
For murther'd Lausus, on his cruel foe; 
Or, if inexorable fate deny 
Our conquest, with thy conquer'd master die: 
For, after such a lord, rest secure, 
Thou wilt no foreign reins, or Trojan load endure." 
He said; and straight th' officious courser kneels, 
To take his wonted weight. His hands he fills 
With pointed jav'lins; on his head he lac'd 
His glitt'ring helm, which terribly was grac'd 
With waving horsehair, nodding from afar; 
Then spurr'd his thund'ring steed amidst the war. 
Love, anguish, wrath, and grief, to madness wrought, 
Despair, and secret shame, and conscious thought 
Of inborn worth, his lab'ring soul oppress'd, 
Roll'd in his eyes, and rag'd within his breast. 
Then loud he call'd Aeneas thrice by name: 
The loud repeated voice to glad Aeneas came. 
"Great Jove," he said, "and the far-shooting god, 
Inspire thy mind to make thy challenge good!" 
He spoke no more; but hasten'd, void of fear, 
And threaten'd with his long protended spear. 
To whom Mezentius thus: "Thy vaunts are vain. 
My Lausus lies extended on the plain: 
He's lost! thy conquest is already won; 
The wretched sire is murther'd in the son. 
Nor fate I fear, but all the gods defy. 
Forbear thy threats: my bus'ness is to die; 
But first receive this parting legacy." 
He said; and straight a whirling dart he sent; 
Another after, and another went. 
Round in a spacious ring he rides the field, 
And vainly plies th' impenetrable shield. 
Thrice rode he round; and thrice Aeneas wheel'd, 
Turn'd as he turn'd: the golden orb withstood 
The strokes, and bore about an iron wood. 
Impatient of delay, and weary grown, 
Still to defend, and to defend alone, 
To wrench the darts which in his buckler light, 
Urg'd and o'er-labor'd in unequal fight; 
At length resolv'd, he throws with all his force 
Full at the temples of the warrior horse. 
Just where the stroke was aim'd, th' unerring spear 
Made way, and stood transfix'd thro' either ear. 
Seiz'd with unwonted pain, surpris'd with fright, 
The wounded steed curvets, and, rais'd upright, 
Lights on his feet before; his hoofs behind 
Spring up in air aloft, and lash the wind. 
Down comes the rider headlong from his height: 
His horse came after with unwieldy weight, 
And, flound'ring forward, pitching on his head, 
His lord's incumber'd shoulder overlaid. 
From either host, the mingled shouts and cries 
Of Trojans and Rutulians rend the skies. 
Aeneas, hast'ning, wav'd his fatal sword 
High o'er his head, with this reproachful word: 
"Now; where are now thy vaunts, the fierce disdain 
Of proud Mezentius, and the lofty strain?" 
Struggling, and wildly staring on the skies, 
With scarce recover'd sight he thus replies: 
"Why these insulting words, this waste of breath, 
To souls undaunted, and secure of death? 
'T is no dishonor for the brave to die, 
Nor came I here with hope victory; 
Nor ask I life, nor fought with that design: 
As I had us'd my fortune, use thou thine. 
My dying son contracted no such band; 
The gift is hateful from his murd'rer's hand. 
For this, this only favor let me sue, 
If pity can to conquer'd foes be due: 
Refuse it not; but let my body have 
The last retreat of humankind, a grave. 
Too well I know th' insulting people's hate; 
Protect me from their vengeance after fate: 
This refuge for my poor remains provide, 
And lay my much-lov'd Lausus by my side." 
He said, and to the sword his throat applied. 
The crimson stream distain'd his arms around, 
And the disdainful soul came rushing thro' the wound. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XI

Scarce had the rosy Morning rais'd her head 
Above the waves, and left her wat'ry bed; 
The pious chief, whom double cares attend 
For his unburied soldiers and his friend, 
Yet first to Heav'n perform'd a victor's vows: 
He bar'd an ancient oak of all her boughs; 
Then on a rising ground the trunk he plac'd, 
Which with the spoils of his dead foe he grac'd. 
The coat of arms by proud Mezentius worn, 
Now on a naked snag in triumph borne, 
Was hung on high, and glitter'd from afar, 
A trophy sacred to the God of War. 
Above his arms, fix'd on the leafless wood, 
Appear'd his plumy crest, besmear'd with blood: 
His brazen buckler on the left was seen; 
Truncheons of shiver'd lances hung between; 
And on the right was placed his corslet, bor'd; 
And to the neck was tied his unavailing sword. 
A crowd of chiefs inclose the godlike man, 
Who thus, conspicuous in the midst, began: 
"Our toils, my friends, are crown'd with sure success; 
The greater part perform'd, achieve the less. 
Now follow cheerful to the trembling town; 
Press but an entrance, and presume it won. 
Fear is no more, for fierce Mezentius lies, 
As the first fruits of war, a sacrifice. 
Turnus shall fall extended on the plain, 
And, in this omen, is already slain. 
Prepar'd in arms, pursue your happy chance; 
That none unwarn'd may plead his ignorance, 
And I, at Heav'n's appointed hour, may find 
Your warlike ensigns waving in the wind. 
Meantime the rites and fun'ral pomps prepare, 
Due to your dead companions of the war: 
The last respect the living can bestow, 
To shield their shadows from contempt below. 
That conquer'd earth be theirs, for which they fought, 
And which for us with their own blood they bought; 
But first the corpse of our unhappy friend 
To the sad city of Evander send, 
Who, not inglorious, in his age's bloom, 
Was hurried hence by too severe a doom." 
Thus, weeping while he spoke, he took his way, 
Where, new in death, lamented Pallas lay. 
Acoetes watch'd the corpse; whose youth deserv'd 
The father's trust; and now the son he serv'd 
With equal faith, but less auspicious care. 
Th' attendants of the slain his sorrow share. 
A troop of Trojans mix'd with these appear, 
And mourning matrons with dishevel'd hair. 
Soon as the prince appears, they raise a cry; 
All beat their breasts, and echoes rend the sky. 
They rear his drooping forehead from the ground; 
But, when Aeneas view'd the grisly wound 
Which Pallas in his manly bosom bore, 
And the fair flesh distain'd with purple gore; 
First, melting into tears, the pious man 
Deplor'd so sad a sight, then thus began: 
"Unhappy youth! when Fortune gave the rest 
Of my full wishes, she refus'd the best! 
She came; but brought not thee along, to bless 
My longing eyes, and share in my success: 
She grudg'd thy safe return, the triumphs due 
To prosp'rous valor, in the public view. 
Not thus I promis'd, when thy father lent 
Thy needless succor with a sad consent; 
Embrac'd me, parting for th' Etrurian land, 
And sent me to possess a large command. 
He warn'd, and from his own experience told, 
Our foes were warlike, disciplin'd, and bold. 
And now perhaps, in hopes of thy return, 
Rich odors on his loaded altars burn, 
While we, with vain officious pomp, prepare 
To send him back his portion of the war, 
A bloody breathless body, which can owe 
No farther debt, but to the pow'rs below. 
The wretched father, ere his race is run, 
Shall view the fun'ral honors of his son. 
These are my triumphs of the Latian war, 
Fruits of my plighted faith and boasted care! 
And yet, unhappy sire, thou shalt not see 
A son whose death disgrac'd his ancestry; 
Thou shalt not blush, old man, however griev'd: 
Thy Pallas no dishonest wound receiv'd. 
He died no death to make thee wish, too late, 
Thou hadst not liv'd to see his shameful fate: 
But what a champion has th' Ausonian coast, 
And what a friend hast thou, Ascanius, lost!" 
Thus having mourn'd, he gave the word around, 
To raise the breathless body from the ground; 
And chose a thousand horse, the flow'r of all 
His warlike troops, to wait the funeral, 
To bear him back and share Evander's grief: 
A well-becoming, but a weak relief. 
Of oaken twigs they twist an easy bier, 
Then on their shoulders the sad burden rear. 
The body on this rural hearse is borne: 
Strew'd leaves and funeral greens the bier adorn. 
All pale he lies, and looks a lovely flow'r, 
New cropp'd by virgin hands, to dress the bow'r: 
Unfaded yet, but yet unfed below, 
No more to mother earth or the green stern shall owe. 
Then two fair vests, of wondrous work and cost, 
Of purple woven, and with gold emboss'd, 
For ornament the Trojan hero brought, 
Which with her hands Sidonian Dido wrought. 
One vest array'd the corpse; and one they spread 
O'er his clos'd eyes, and wrapp'd around his head, 
That, when the yellow hair in flame should fall, 
The catching fire might burn the golden caul. 
Besides, the spoils of foes in battle slain, 
When he descended on the Latian plain; 
Arms, trappings, horses, by the hearse are led 
In long array- th' achievements of the dead. 
Then, pinion'd with their hands behind, appear 
Th' unhappy captives, marching in the rear, 
Appointed off'rings in the victor's name, 
To sprinkle with their blood the fun'ral flame. 
Inferior trophies by the chiefs are borne; 
Gauntlets and helms their loaded hands adorn; 
And fair inscriptions fix'd, and titles read 
Of Latian leaders conquer'd by the dead. 
Acoetes on his pupil's corpse attends, 
With feeble steps, supported by his friends. 
Pausing at ev'ry pace, in sorrow drown'd, 
Betwixt their arms he sinks upon the ground; 
Where grov'ling while he lies in deep despair, 
He beats his breast, and rends his hoary hair. 
The champion's chariot next is seen to roll, 
Besmear'd with hostile blood, and honorably foul. 
To close the pomp, Aethon, the steed of state, 
Is led, the fun'rals of his lord to wait. 
Stripp'd of his trappings, with a sullen pace 
He walks; and the big tears run rolling down his face. 
The lance of Pallas, and the crimson crest, 
Are borne behind: the victor seiz'd the rest. 
The march begins: the trumpets hoarsely sound; 
The pikes and lances trail along the ground. 
Thus while the Trojan and Arcadian horse 
To Pallantean tow'rs direct their course, 
In long procession rank'd, the pious chief 
Stopp'd in the rear, and gave a vent to grief: 
"The public care," he said, "which war attends, 
Diverts our present woes, at least suspends. 
Peace with the manes of great Pallas dwell! 
Hail, holy relics! and a last farewell!" 
He said no more, but, inly thro' he mourn'd, 
Restrained his tears, and to the camp return'd. 
Now suppliants, from Laurentum sent, demand 
A truce, with olive branches in their hand; 
Obtest his clemency, and from the plain 
Beg leave to draw the bodies of their slain. 
They plead, that none those common rites deny 
To conquer'd foes that in fair battle die. 
All cause of hate was ended in their death; 
Nor could he war with bodies void of breath. 
A king, they hop'd, would hear a king's request, 
Whose son he once was call'd, and once his guest. 
Their suit, which was too just to be denied, 
The hero grants, and farther thus replied: 
"O Latian princes, how severe a fate 
In causeless quarrels has involv'd your state, 
And arm'd against an unoffending man, 
Who sought your friendship ere the war began! 
You beg a truce, which I would gladly give, 
Not only for the slain, but those who live. 
I came not hither but by Heav'n's command, 
And sent by fate to share the Latian land. 
Nor wage I wars unjust: your king denied 
My proffer'd friendship, and my promis'd bride; 
Left me for Turnus. Turnus then should try 
His cause in arms, to conquer or to die. 
My right and his are in dispute: the slain 
Fell without fault, our quarrel to maintain. 
In equal arms let us alone contend; 
And let him vanquish, whom his fates befriend. 
This is the way (so tell him) to possess 
The royal virgin, and restore the peace. 
Bear this message back, with ample leave, 
That your slain friends may fun'ral rites receive." 
Thus having said- th' embassadors, amaz'd, 
Stood mute a while, and on each other gaz'd. 
Drances, their chief, who harbor'd in his breast 
Long hate to Turnus, as his foe profess'd, 
Broke silence first, and to the godlike man, 
With graceful action bowing, thus began: 
"Auspicious prince, in arms a mighty name, 
But yet whose actions far transcend your fame; 
Would I your justice or your force express, 
Thought can but equal; and all words are less. 
Your answer we shall thankfully relate, 
And favors granted to the Latian state. 
If wish'd success our labor shall attend, 
Think peace concluded, and the king your friend: 
Let Turnus leave the realm to your command, 
And seek alliance in some other land: 
Build you the city which your fates assign; 
We shall be proud in the great work to join." 
Thus Drances; and his words so well persuade 
The rest impower'd, that soon a truce is made. 
Twelve days the term allow'd: and, during those, 
Latians and Trojans, now no longer foes, 
Mix'd in the woods, for fun'ral piles prepare 
To fell the timber, and forget the war. 
Loud axes thro' the groaning groves resound; 
Oak, mountain ash, and poplar spread the ground; 
First fall from high; and some the trunks receive 
In loaden wains; with wedges some they cleave. 
And now the fatal news by Fame is blown 
Thro' the short circuit of th' Arcadian town, 
Of Pallas slain- by Fame, which just before 
His triumphs on distended pinions bore. 
Rushing from out the gate, the people stand, 
Each with a fun'ral flambeau in his hand. 
Wildly they stare, distracted with amaze: 
The fields are lighten'd with a fiery blaze, 
That cast a sullen splendor on their friends, 
The marching troop which their dead prince attends. 
Both parties meet: they raise a doleful cry; 
The matrons from the walls with shrieks reply, 
And their mix'd mourning rends the vaulted sky. 
The town is fill'd with tumult and with tears, 
Till the loud clamors reach Evander's ears: 
Forgetful of his state, he runs along, 
With a disorder'd pace, and cleaves the throng; 
Falls on the corpse; and groaning there he lies, 
With silent grief, that speaks but at his eyes. 
Short sighs and sobs succeed; till sorrow breaks 
A passage, and at once he weeps and speaks: 
"O Pallas! thou hast fail'd thy plighted word, 
To fight with caution, not to tempt the sword! 
I warn'd thee, but in vain; for well I knew 
What perils youthful ardor would pursue, 
That boiling blood would carry thee too far, 
Young as thou wert in dangers, raw to war! 
O curst essay of arms, disastrous doom, 
Prelude of bloody fields, and fights to come! 
Hard elements of unauspicious war, 
Vain vows to Heav'n, and unavailing care! 
Thrice happy thou, dear partner of my bed, 
Whose holy soul the stroke of Fortune fled, 
Praescious of ills, and leaving me behind, 
To drink the dregs of life by fate assign'd! 
Beyond the goal of nature I have gone: 
My Pallas late set out, but reach'd too soon. 
If, for my league against th' Ausonian state, 
Amidst their weapons I had found my fate, 
(Deserv'd from them,) then I had been return'd 
A breathless victor, and my son had mourn'd. 
Yet will I not my Trojan friend upbraid, 
Nor grudge th' alliance I so gladly made. 
'T was not his fault, my Pallas fell so young, 
But my own crime, for having liv'd too long. 
Yet, since the gods had destin'd him to die, 
At least he led the way to victory: 
First for his friends he won the fatal shore, 
And sent whole herds of slaughter'd foes before; 
A death too great, too glorious to deplore. 
Nor will I add new honors to thy grave, 
Content with those the Trojan hero gave: 
That funeral pomp thy Phrygian friends design'd, 
In which the Tuscan chiefs and army join'd. 
Great spoils and trophies, gain'd by thee, they bear: 
Then let thy own achievements be thy share. 
Even thou, O Turnus, hadst a trophy stood, 
Whose mighty trunk had better grac'd the wood, 
If Pallas had arriv'd, with equal length 
Of years, to match thy bulk with equal strength. 
But why, unhappy man, dost thou detain 
These troops, to view the tears thou shedd'st in vain? 
Go, friends, this message to your lord relate: 
Tell him, that, if I bear my bitter fate, 
And, after Pallas' death, live ling'ring on, 
'T is to behold his vengeance for my son. 
I stay for Turnus, whose devoted head 
Is owing to the living and the dead. 
My son and I expect it from his hand; 
'T is all that he can give, or we demand. 
Joy is no more; but I would gladly go, 
To greet my Pallas with such news below." 
The morn had now dispell'd the shades of night, 
Restoring toils, when she restor'd the light. 
The Trojan king and Tuscan chief command 
To raise the piles along the winding strand. 
Their friends convey the dead fun'ral fires; 
Black smold'ring smoke from the green wood expires; 
The light of heav'n is chok'd, and the new day retires. 
Then thrice around the kindled piles they go 
(For ancient custom had ordain'd it so) 
Thrice horse and foot about the fires are led; 
And thrice, with loud laments, they hail the dead. 
Tears, trickling down their breasts, bedew the ground, 
And drums and trumpets mix their mournful sound. 
Amid the blaze, their pious brethren throw 
The spoils, in battle taken from the foe: 
Helms, bits emboss'd, and swords of shining steel; 
One casts a target, one a chariot wheel; 
Some to their fellows their own arms restore: 
The fauchions which in luckless fight they bore, 
Their bucklers pierc'd, their darts bestow'd in vain, 
And shiver'd lances gather'd from the plain. 
Whole herds of offer'd bulls, about the fire, 
And bristled boars, and woolly sheep expire. 
Around the piles a careful troop attends, 
To watch the wasting flames, and weep their burning friends;

Ling'ring along the shore, till dewy night 
New decks the face of heav'n with starry light. 
The conquer'd Latians, with like pious care, 
Piles without number for their dead prepare. 
Part in the places where they fell are laid; 
And part are to the neighb'ring fields convey'd. 
The corps of kings, and captains of renown, 
Borne off in state, are buried in the town; 
The rest, unhonor'd, and without a name, 
Are cast a common heap to feed the flame. 
Trojans and Latians vie with like desires 
To make the field of battle shine with fires, 
And the promiscuous blaze to heav'n aspires. 
Now had the morning thrice renew'd the light, 
And thrice dispell'd the shadows of the night, 
When those who round the wasted fires remain, 
Perform the last sad office to the slain. 
They rake the yet warm ashes from below; 
These, and the bones unburn'd, in earth bestow; 
These relics with their country rites they grace, 
And raise a mount of turf to mark the place. 
But, in the palace of the king, appears 
A scene more solemn, and a pomp of tears. 
Maids, matrons, widows, mix their common moans; 
Orphans their sires, and sires lament their sons. 
All in that universal sorrow share, 
And curse the cause of this unhappy war: 
A broken league, a bride unjustly sought, 
A crown usurp'd, which with their blood is bought! 
These are the crimes with which they load the name 
Of Turnus, and on him alone exclaim: 
"Let him who lords it o'er th' Ausonian land 
Engage the Trojan hero hand to hand: 
His is the gain; our lot is but to serve; 
'T is just, the sway he seeks, he should deserve." 
This Drances aggravates; and adds, with spite: 
"His foe expects, and dares him to the fight." 
Nor Turnus wants a party, to support 
His cause and credit in the Latian court. 
His former acts secure his present fame, 
And the queen shades him with her mighty name. 
While thus their factious minds with fury burn, 
The legates from th' Aetolian prince return: 
Sad news they bring, that, after all the cost 
And care employ'd, their embassy is lost; 
That Diomedes refus'd his aid in war, 
Unmov'd with presents, and as deaf to pray'r. 
Some new alliance must elsewhere be sought, 
Or peace with Troy on hard conditions bought. 
Latinus, sunk in sorrow, finds too late, 
A foreign son is pointed out by fate; 
And, till Aeneas shall Lavinia wed, 
The wrath of Heav'n is hov'ring o'er his head. 
The gods, he saw, espous'd the juster side, 
When late their titles in the field were tried: 
Witness the fresh laments, and fun'ral tears undried. 
Thus, full of anxious thought, he summons all 
The Latian senate to the council hall. 
The princes come, commanded by their head, 
And crowd the paths that to the palace lead. 
Supreme in pow'r, and reverenc'd for his years, 
He takes the throne, and in the midst appears. 
Majestically sad, he sits in state, 
And bids his envoys their success relate. 
When Venulus began, the murmuring sound 
Was hush'd, and sacred silence reign'd around. 
"We have," said he, "perform'd your high command, 
And pass'd with peril a long tract of land: 
We reach'd the place desir'd; with wonder fill'd, 
The Grecian tents and rising tow'rs beheld. 
Great Diomede has compass'd round with walls 
The city, which Argyripa he calls, 
From his own Argos nam'd. We touch'd, with joy, 
The royal hand that raz'd unhappy Troy. 
When introduc'd, our presents first we bring, 
Then crave an instant audience from the king. 
His leave obtain'd, our native soil we name, 
And tell th' important cause for which we came. 
Attentively he heard us, while we spoke; 
Then, with soft accents, and a pleasing look, 
Made this return: 'Ausonian race, of old 
Renown'd for peace, and for an age of gold, 
What madness has your alter'd minds possess'd, 
To change for war hereditary rest, 
Solicit arms unknown, and tempt the sword, 
A needless ill your ancestors abhorr'd? 
We- for myself I speak, and all the name 
Of Grecians, who to Troy's destruction came, 
Omitting those who were in battle slain, 
Or borne by rolling Simois to the main- 
Not one but suffer'd, and too dearly bought 
The prize of honor which in arms he sought; 
Some doom'd to death, and some in exile driv'n. 
Outcasts, abandon'd by the care of Heav'n; 
So worn, so wretched, so despis'd a crew, 
As ev'n old Priam might with pity view. 
Witness the vessels by Minerva toss'd 
In storms; the vengeful Capharean coast; 
Th' Euboean rocks! the prince, whose brother led 
Our armies to revenge his injur'd bed, 
In Egypt lost! Ulysses with his men 
Have seen Charybdis and the Cyclops' den. 
Why should I name Idomeneus, in vain 
Restor'd to scepters, and expell'd again? 
Or young Achilles, by his rival slain? 
Ev'n he, the King of Men, the foremost name 
Of all the Greeks, and most renown'd by fame, 
The proud revenger of another's wife, 
Yet by his own adult'ress lost his life; 
Fell at his threshold; and the spoils of Troy 
The foul polluters of his bed enjoy. 
The gods have envied me the sweets of life, 
My much lov'd country, and my more lov'd wife: 
Banish'd from both, I mourn; while in the sky, 
Transform'd to birds, my lost companions fly: 
Hov'ring about the coasts, they make their moan, 
And cuff the cliffs with pinions not their own. 
What squalid specters, in the dead of night, 
Break my short sleep, and skim before my sight! 
I might have promis'd to myself those harms, 
Mad as I was, when I, with mortal arms, 
Presum'd against immortal pow'rs to move, 
And violate with wounds the Queen of Love. 
Such arms this hand shall never more employ; 
No hate remains with me to ruin'd Troy. 
I war not with its dust; nor am I glad 
To think of past events, or good or bad. 
Your presents I return: whate'er you bring 
To buy my friendship, send the Trojan king. 
We met in fight; I know him, to my cost: 
With what a whirling force his lance he toss'd! 
Heav'ns! what a spring was in his arm, to throw! 
How high he held his shield, and rose at ev'ry blow! 
Had Troy produc'd two more his match in might, 
They would have chang'd the fortune of the fight: 
Th' invasion of the Greeks had been return'd, 
Our empire wasted, and our cities burn'd. 
The long defense the Trojan people made, 
The war protracted, and the siege delay'd, 
Were due to Hector's and this hero's hand: 
Both brave alike, and equal in command; 
Aeneas, not inferior in the field, 
In pious reverence to the gods excell'd. 
Make peace, ye Latians, and avoid with care 
Th' impending dangers of a fatal war.' 
He said no more; but, with this cold excuse, 
Refus'd th' alliance, and advis'd a truce." 
Thus Venulus concluded his report. 
A jarring murmur fill'd the factious court: 
As, when a torrent rolls with rapid force, 
And dashes o'er the stones that stop the course, 
The flood, constrain'd within a scanty space, 
Roars horrible along th' uneasy race; 
White foam in gath'ring eddies floats around; 
The rocky shores rebellow to the sound. 
The murmur ceas'd: then from his lofty throne 
The king invok'd the gods, and thus begun: 
"I wish, ye Latins, what we now debate 
Had been resolv'd before it was too late. 
Much better had it been for you and me, 
Unforc'd by this our last necessity, 
To have been earlier wise, than now to call 
A council, when the foe surrounds the wall. 
O citizens, we wage unequal war, 
With men not only Heav'n's peculiar care, 
But Heav'n's own race; unconquer'd in the field, 
Or, conquer'd, yet unknowing how to yield. 
What hopes you had in Diomedes, lay down: 
Our hopes must center on ourselves alone. 
Yet those how feeble, and, indeed, how vain, 
You see too well; nor need my words explain. 
Vanquish'd without resource; laid flat by fate; 
Factions within, a foe without the gate! 
Not but I grant that all perform'd their parts 
With manly force, and with undaunted hearts: 
With our united strength the war we wag'd; 
With equal numbers, equal arms, engag'd. 
You see th' event.- Now hear what I propose, 
To save our friends, and satisfy our foes. 
A tract of land the Latins have possess'd 
Along the Tiber, stretching to the west, 
Which now Rutulians and Auruncans till, 
And their mix'd cattle graze the fruitful hill. 
Those mountains fill'd with firs, that lower land, 
If you consent, the Trojan shall command, 
Call'd into part of what is ours; and there, 
On terms agreed, the common country share. 
There let'em build and settle, if they please; 
Unless they choose once more to cross the seas, 
In search of seats remote from Italy, 
And from unwelcome inmates set us free. 
Then twice ten galleys let us build with speed, 
Or twice as many more, if more they need. 
Materials are at hand; a well-grown wood 
Runs equal with the margin of the flood: 
Let them the number and the form assign; 
The care and cost of all the stores be mine. 
To treat the peace, a hundred senators 
Shall be commission'd hence with ample pow'rs, 
With olive the presents they shall bear, 
A purple robe, a royal iv'ry chair, 
And all the marks of sway that Latian monarchs wear, 
And sums of gold. Among yourselves debate 
This great affair, and save the sinking state." 
Then Drances took the word, who grudg'd, long since, 
The rising glories of the Daunian prince. 
Factious and rich, bold at the council board, 
But cautious in the field, he shunn'd the sword; 
A close caballer, and tongue-valiant lord. 
Noble his mother was, and near the throne; 
But, what his father's parentage, unknown. 
He rose, and took th' advantage of the times, 
To load young Turnus with invidious crimes. 
"Such truths, O king," said he, "your words contain, 
As strike the sense, and all replies are vain; 
Nor are your loyal subjects now to seek 
What common needs require, but fear to speak. 
Let him give leave of speech, that haughty man, 
Whose pride this unauspicious war began; 
For whose ambition (let me dare to say, 
Fear set apart, tho' death is in my way) 
The plains of Latium run with blood around. 
So many valiant heroes bite the ground; 
Dejected grief in ev'ry face appears; 
A town in mourning, and a land in tears; 
While he, th' undoubted author of our harms, 
The man who menaces the gods with arms, 
Yet, after all his boasts, forsook the fight, 
And sought his safety in ignoble flight. 
Now, best of kings, since you propose to send 
Such bounteous presents to your Trojan friend; 
Add yet a greater at our joint request, 
One which he values more than all the rest: 
Give him the fair Lavinia for his bride; 
With that alliance let the league be tied, 
And for the bleeding land a lasting peace provide. 
Let insolence no longer awe the throne; 
But, with a father's right, bestow your own. 
For this maligner of the general good, 
If still we fear his force, he must be woo'd; 
His haughty godhead we with pray'rs implore, 
Your scepter to release, and our just rights restore. 
O cursed cause of all our ills, must we 
Wage wars unjust, and fall in fight, for thee! 
What right hast thou to rule the Latian state, 
And send us out to meet our certain fate? 
'T is a destructive war: from Turnus' hand 
Our peace and public safety we demand. 
Let the fair bride to the brave chief remain; 
If not, the peace, without the pledge, is vain. 
Turnus, I know you think me not your friend, 
Nor will I much with your belief contend: 
I beg your greatness not to give the law 
In others' realms, but, beaten, to withdraw. 
Pity your own, or pity our estate; 
Nor twist our fortunes with your sinking fate. 
Your interest is, the war should never cease; 
But we have felt enough to wish the peace: 
A land exhausted to the last remains, 
Depopulated towns, and driven plains. 
Yet, if desire of fame, and thirst of pow'r, 
A beauteous princess, with a crown in dow'r, 
So fire your mind, in arms assert your right, 
And meet your foe, who dares you to the fight. 
Mankind, it seems, is made for you alone; 
We, but the slaves who mount you to the throne: 
A base ignoble crowd, without a name, 
Unwept, unworthy, of the fun'ral flame, 
By duty bound to forfeit each his life, 
That Turnus may possess a royal wife. 
Permit not, mighty man, so mean a crew 
Should share such triumphs, and detain from you 
The post of honor, your undoubted due. 
Rather alone your matchless force employ, 
To merit what alone you must enjoy." 
These words, so full of malice mix'd with art, 
Inflam'd with rage the youthful hero's heart. 
Then, groaning from the bottom of his breast, 
He heav'd for wind, and thus his wrath express'd: 
"You, Drances, never want a stream of words, 
Then, when the public need requires our swords. 
First in the council hall to steer the state, 
And ever foremost in a tongue-debate, 
While our strong walls secure us from the foe, 
Ere yet with blood our ditches overflow: 
But let the potent orator declaim, 
And with the brand of coward blot my name; 
Free leave is giv'n him, when his fatal hand 
Has cover'd with more corps the sanguine strand, 
And high as mine his tow'ring trophies stand. 
If any doubt remains, who dares the most, 
Let us decide it at the Trojan's cost, 
And issue both abreast, where honor calls- 
Foes are not far to seek without the walls- 
Unless his noisy tongue can only fight, 
And feet were giv'n him but to speed his flight. 
I beaten from the field? I forc'd away? 
Who, but so known a dastard, dares to say? 
Had he but ev'n beheld the fight, his eyes 
Had witness'd for me what his tongue denies: 
What heaps of Trojans by this hand were slain, 
And how the bloody Tiber swell'd the main. 
All saw, but he, th' Arcadian troops retire 
In scatter'd squadrons, and their prince expire. 
The giant brothers, in their camp, have found, 
I was not forc'd with ease to quit my ground. 
Not such the Trojans tried me, when, inclos'd, 
I singly their united arms oppos'd: 
First forc'd an entrance thro' their thick array; 
Then, glutted with their slaughter, freed my way. 
'T is a destructive war? So let it be, 
But to the Phrygian pirate, and to thee! 
Meantime proceed to fill the people's ears 
With false reports, their minds with panic fears: 
Extol the strength of a twice-conquer'd race; 
Our foes encourage, and our friends debase. 
Believe thy fables, and the Trojan town 
Triumphant stands; the Grecians are o'erthrown; 
Suppliant at Hector's feet Achilles lies, 
And Diomede from fierce Aeneas flies. 
Say rapid Aufidus with awful dread 
Runs backward from the sea, and hides his head, 
When the great Trojan on his bank appears; 
For that's as true as thy dissembled fears 
Of my revenge. Dismiss that vanity: 
Thou, Drances, art below a death from me. 
Let that vile soul in that vile body rest; 
The lodging is well worthy of the guest. 
"Now, royal father, to the present state 
Of our affairs, and of this high debate: 
If in your arms thus early you diffide, 
And think your fortune is already tried; 
If one defeat has brought us down so low, 
As never more in fields to meet the foe; 
Then I conclude for peace: 't is time to treat, 
And lie like vassals at the victor's feet. 
But, O! if any ancient blood remains, 
One drop of all our fathers', in our veins, 
That man would I prefer before the rest, 
Who dar'd his death with an undaunted breast; 
Who comely fell, by no dishonest wound, 
To shun that sight, and, dying, gnaw'd the ground. 
But, if we still have fresh recruits in store, 
If our confederates can afford us more; 
If the contended field we bravely fought, 
And not a bloodless victory was bought; 
Their losses equal'd ours; and, for their slain, 
With equal fires they fill'd the shining plain; 
Why thus, unforc'd, should we so tamely yield, 
And, ere the trumpet sounds, resign the field? 
Good unexpected, evils unforeseen, 
Appear by turns, as fortune shifts the scene: 
Some, rais'd aloft, come tumbling down amain; 
Then fall so hard, they bound and rise again. 
If Diomede refuse his aid to lend, 
The great Messapus yet remains our friend: 
Tolumnius, who foretells events, is ours; 
Th' Italian chiefs and princes join their pow'rs: 
Nor least in number, nor in name the last, 
Your own brave subjects have your cause embrac'd 
Above the rest, the Volscian Amazon 
Contains an army in herself alone, 
And heads a squadron, terrible to sight, 
With glitt'ring shields, in brazen armor bright. 
Yet, if the foe a single fight demand, 
And I alone the public peace withstand; 
If you consent, he shall not be refus'd, 
Nor find a hand to victory unus'd. 
This new Achilles, let him take the field, 
With fated armor, and Vulcanian shield! 
For you, my royal father, and my fame, 
I, Turnus, not the least of all my name, 
Devote my soul. He calls me hand to hand, 
And I alone will answer his demand. 
Drances shall rest secure, and neither share 
The danger, nor divide the prize of war." 
While they debate, nor these nor those will yield, 
Aeneas draws his forces to the field, 
And moves his camp. The scouts with flying speed 
Return, and thro' the frighted city spread 
Th' unpleasing news, the Trojans are descried, 
In battle marching by the river side, 
And bending to the town. They take th' alarm: 
Some tremble, some are bold; all in confusion arm. 
Th' impetuous youth press forward to the field; 
They clash the sword, and clatter on the shield: 
The fearful matrons raise a screaming cry; 
Old feeble men with fainter groans reply; 
A jarring sound results, and mingles in the sky, 
Like that of swans remurm'ring to the floods, 
Or birds of diff'ring kinds in hollow woods. 
Turnus th' occasion takes, and cries aloud: 
"Talk on, ye quaint haranguers of the crowd: 
Declaim in praise of peace, when danger calls, 
And the fierce foes in arms approach the walls." 
He said, and, turning short, with speedy pace, 
Casts back a scornful glance, and quits the place: 
"Thou, Volusus, the Volscian troops command 
To mount; and lead thyself our Ardean band. 
Messapus and Catillus, post your force 
Along the fields, to charge the Trojan horse. 
Some guard the passes, others man the wall; 
Drawn up in arms, the rest attend my call." 
They swarm from ev'ry quarter of the town, 
And with disorder'd haste the rampires crown. 
Good old Latinus, when he saw, too late, 
The gath'ring storm just breaking on the state, 
Dismiss'd the council till a fitter time, 
And own'd his easy temper as his crime, 
Who, forc'd against his reason, had complied 
To break the treaty for the promis'd bride. 
Some help to sink new trenches; others aid 
To ram the stones, or raise the palisade. 
Hoarse trumpets sound th' alarm; around the walls 
Runs a distracted crew, whom their last labor calls. 
A sad procession in the streets is seen, 
Of matrons, that attend the mother queen: 
High in her chair she sits, and, at her side, 
With downcast eyes, appears the fatal bride. 
They mount the cliff, where Pallas' temple stands; 
Pray'rs in their mouths, and presents in their hands, 
With censers first they fume the sacred shrine, 
Then in this common supplication join: 
"O patroness of arms, unspotted maid, 
Propitious hear, and lend thy Latins aid! 
Break short the pirate's lance; pronounce his fate, 
And lay the Phrygian low before the gate." 
Now Turnus arms for fight. His back and breast 
Well-temper'd steel and scaly brass invest: 
The cuishes which his brawny thighs infold 
Are mingled metal damask'd o'er with gold. 
His faithful fauchion sits upon his side; 
Nor casque, nor crest, his manly features hide: 
But, bare to view, amid surrounding friends, 
With godlike grace, he from the tow'r descends. 
Exulting in his strength, he seems to dare 
His absent rival, and to promise war. 
Freed from his keepers, thus, with broken reins, 
The wanton courser prances o'er the plains, 
Or in the pride of youth o'erleaps the mounds, 
And snuffs the females in forbidden grounds. 
Or seeks his wat'ring in the well-known flood, 
To quench his thirst, and cool his fiery blood: 
He swims luxuriant in the liquid plain, 
And o'er his shoulder flows his waving mane: 
He neighs, he snorts, he bears his head on high; 
Before his ample chest the frothy waters fly. 
Soon as the prince appears without the gate, 
The Volscians, with their virgin leader, wait 
His last commands. Then, with a graceful mien, 
Lights from her lofty steed the warrior queen: 
Her squadron imitates, and each descends; 
Whose common suit Camilla thus commends: 
"If sense of honor, if a soul secure 
Of inborn worth, that can all tests endure, 
Can promise aught, or on itself rely 
Greatly to dare, to conquer or to die; 
Then, I alone, sustain'd by these, will meet 
The Tyrrhene troops, and promise their defeat. 
Ours be the danger, ours the sole renown: 
You, gen'ral, stay behind, and guard the town:" 
Turnus a while stood mute, with glad surprise, 
And on the fierce virago fix'd his eyes; 
Then thus return'd: "O grace of Italy, 
With what becoming thanks can I reply? 
Not only words lie lab'ring in my breast, 
But thought itself is by thy praise oppress'd. 
Yet rob me not of all; but let me join 
My toils, my hazard, and my fame, with thine. 
The Trojan, not in stratagem unskill'd, 
Sends his light horse before to scour the field: 
Himself, thro' steep ascents and thorny brakes, 
A larger compass to the city takes. 
This news my scouts confirm, and I prepare 
To foil his cunning, and his force to dare; 
With chosen foot his passage to forelay, 
And place an ambush in the winding way. 
Thou, with thy Volscians, face the Tuscan horse; 
The brave Messapus shall thy troops inforce 
With those of Tibur, and the Latian band, 
Subjected all to thy supreme command." 
This said, he warns Messapus to the war, 
Then ev'ry chief exhorts with equal care. 
All thus encourag'd, his own troops he joins, 
And hastes to prosecute his deep designs. 
Inclos'd with hills, a winding valley lies, 
By nature form'd for fraud, and fitted for surprise. 
A narrow track, by human steps untrode, 
Leads, thro' perplexing thorns, to this obscure abode. 
High o'er the vale a steepy mountain stands, 
Whence the surveying sight the nether ground commands. 
The top is level, an offensive seat 
Of war; and from the war a safe retreat: 
For, on the right and left, is room to press 
The foes at hand, or from afar distress; 
To drive 'em headlong downward, and to pour 
On their descending backs a stony show'r. 
Thither young Turnus took the well-known way, 
Possess'd the pass, and in blind ambush lay. 
Meantime Latonian Phoebe, from the skies, 
Beheld th' approaching war with hateful eyes, 
And call'd the light-foot Opis to her aid, 
Her most belov'd and ever-trusty maid; 
Then with a sigh began: "Camilla goes 
To meet her death amidst her fatal foes: 
The nymphs I lov'd of all my mortal train, 
Invested with Diana's arms, in vain. 
Nor is my kindness for the virgin new: 
'T was born with her; and with her years it grew. 
Her father Metabus, when forc'd away 
From old Privernum, for tyrannic sway, 
Snatch'd up, and sav'd from his prevailing foes, 
This tender babe, companion of his woes. 
Casmilla was her mother; but he drown'd 
One hissing letter in a softer sound, 
And call'd Camilla. Thro' the woods he flies; 
Wrapp'd in his robe the royal infant lies. 
His foes in sight, he mends his weary pace; 
With shout and clamors they pursue the chase. 
The banks of Amasene at length he gains: 
The raging flood his farther flight restrains, 
Rais'd o'er the borders with unusual rains. 
Prepar'd to plunge into the stream, he fears, 
Not for himself, but for the charge he bears. 
Anxious, he stops a while, and thinks in haste; 
Then, desp'rate in distress, resolves at last. 
A knotty lance of well-boil'd oak he bore; 
The middle part with cork he cover'd o'er: 
He clos'd the child within the hollow space; 
With twigs of bending osier bound the case; 
Then pois'd the spear, heavy with human weight, 
And thus invok'd my favor for the freight: 
'Accept, great goddess of the woods,' he said, 
'Sent by her sire, this dedicated maid! 
Thro' air she flies a suppliant to thy shrine; 
And the first weapons that she knows, are thine.' 
He said; and with full force the spear he threw: 
Above the sounding waves Camilla flew. 
Then, press'd by foes, he stemm'd the stormy tide, 
And gain'd, by stress of arms, the farther side. 
His fasten'd spear he pull'd from out the ground, 
And, victor of his vows, his infant nymph unbound; 
Nor, after that, in towns which walls inclose, 
Would trust his hunted life amidst his foes; 
But, rough, in open air he chose to lie; 
Earth was his couch, his cov'ring was the sky. 
On hills unshorn, or in a desart den, 
He shunn'd the dire society of men. 
A shepherd's solitary life he led; 
His daughter with the milk of mares he fed. 
The dugs of bears, and ev'ry salvage beast, 
He drew, and thro' her lips the liquor press'd. 
The little Amazon could scarcely go: 
He loads her with a quiver and a bow; 
And, that she might her stagg'ring steps command, 
He with a slender jav'lin fills her hand. 
Her flowing hair no golden fillet bound; 
Nor swept her trailing robe the dusty ground. 
Instead of these, a tiger's hide o'erspread 
Her back and shoulders, fasten'd to her head. 
The flying dart she first attempts to fling, 
And round her tender temples toss'd the sling; 
Then, as her strength with years increas'd, began 
To pierce aloft in air the soaring swan, 
And from the clouds to fetch the heron and the crane. 
The Tuscan matrons with each other vied, 
To bless their rival sons with such a bride; 
But she disdains their love, to share with me 
The sylvan shades and vow'd virginity. 
And, O! I wish, contented with my cares 
Of salvage spoils, she had not sought the wars! 
Then had she been of my celestial train, 
And shunn'd the fate that dooms her to be slain. 
But since, opposing Heav'n's decree, she goes 
To find her death among forbidden foes, 
Haste with these arms, and take thy steepy flight. 
Where, with the gods, averse, the Latins fight. 
This bow to thee, this quiver I bequeath, 
This chosen arrow, to revenge her death: 
By whate'er hand Camilla shall be slain, 
Or of the Trojan or Italian train, 
Let him not pass unpunish'd from the plain. 
Then, in a hollow cloud, myself will aid 
To bear the breathless body of my maid: 
Unspoil'd shall be her arms, and unprofan'd 
Her holy limbs with any human hand, 
And in a marble tomb laid in her native land." 
She said. The faithful nymph descends from high 
With rapid flight, and cuts the sounding sky: 
Black clouds and stormy winds around her body fly. 
By this, the Trojan and the Tuscan horse, 
Drawn up in squadrons, with united force, 
Approach the walls: the sprightly coursers bound, 
Press forward on their bits, and shift their ground. 
Shields, arms, and spears flash horribly from far; 
And the fields glitter with a waving war. 
Oppos'd to these, come on with furious force 
Messapus, Coras, and the Latian horse; 
These in the body plac'd, on either hand 
Sustain'd and clos'd by fair Camilla's band. 
Advancing in a line, they couch their spears; 
And less and less the middle space appears. 
Thick smoke obscures the field; and scarce are seen 
The neighing coursers, and the shouting men. 
In distance of their darts they stop their course; 
Then man to man they rush, and horse to horse. 
The face of heav'n their flying jav'lins hide, 
And deaths unseen are dealt on either side. 
Tyrrhenus, and Aconteus, void of fear, 
By mettled coursers borne in full career, 
Meet first oppos'd; and, with a mighty shock, 
Their horses' heads against each other knock. 
Far from his steed is fierce Aconteus cast, 
As with an engine's force, or lightning's blast: 
He rolls along in blood, and breathes his last. 
The Latin squadrons take a sudden fright, 
And sling their shields behind, to save their backs in flight

Spurring at speed to their own walls they drew; 
Close in the rear the Tuscan troops pursue, 
And urge their flight: Asylas leads the chase; 
Till, seiz'd, with shame, they wheel about and face, 
Receive their foes, and raise a threat'ning cry. 
The Tuscans take their turn to fear and fly. 
So swelling surges, with a thund'ring roar, 
Driv'n on each other's backs, insult the shore, 
Bound o'er the rocks, incroach upon the land, 
And far upon the beach eject the sand; 
Then backward, with a swing, they take their way, 
Repuls'd from upper ground, and seek their mother sea; 
With equal hurry quit th' invaded shore, 
And swallow back the sand and stones they spew'd before.

Twice were the Tuscans masters of the field, 
Twice by the Latins, in their turn, repell'd. 
Asham'd at length, to the third charge they ran; 
Both hosts resolv'd, and mingled man to man. 
Now dying groans are heard; the fields are strow'd 
With falling bodies, and are drunk with blood. 
Arms, horses, men, on heaps together lie: 
Confus'd the fight, and more confus'd the cry. 
Orsilochus, who durst not press too near 
Strong Remulus, at distance drove his spear, 
And stuck the steel beneath his horse's ear. 
The fiery steed, impatient of the wound, 
Curvets, and, springing upward with a bound, 
His helpless lord cast backward on the ground. 
Catillus pierc'd Iolas first; then drew 
His reeking lance, and at Herminius threw, 
The mighty champion of the Tuscan crew. 
His neck and throat unarm'd, his head was bare, 
But shaded with a length of yellow hair: 
Secure, he fought, expos'd on ev'ry part, 
A spacious mark for swords, and for the flying dart. 
Across the shoulders came the feather'd wound; 
Transfix'd he fell, and doubled to the ground. 
The sands with streaming blood are sanguine dyed, 
And death with honor sought on either side. 
Resistless thro' the war Camilla rode, 
In danger unappall'd, and pleas'd with blood. 
One side was bare for her exerted breast; 
One shoulder with her painted quiver press'd. 
Now from afar her fatal jav'lins play; 
Now with her ax's edge she hews her way: 
Diana's arms upon her shoulder sound; 
And when, too closely press'd, she quits the ground, 
From her bent bow she sends a backward wound. 
Her maids, in martial pomp, on either side, 
Larina, Tulla, fierce Tarpeia, ride: 
Italians all; in peace, their queen's delight; 
In war, the bold companions of the fight. 
So march'd the Tracian Amazons of old, 
When Thermodon with bloody billows roll'd: 
Such troops as these in shining arms were seen, 
When Theseus met in fight their maiden queen: 
Such to the field Penthisilea led, 
From the fierce virgin when the Grecians fled; 
With such, return'd triumphant from the war, 
Her maids with cries attend the lofty car; 
They clash with manly force their moony shields; 
With female shouts resound the Phrygian fields. 
Who foremost, and who last, heroic maid, 
On the cold earth were by thy courage laid? 
Thy spear, of mountain ash, Eumenius first, 
With fury driv'n, from side to side transpierc'd: 
A purple stream came spouting from the wound; 
Bath'd in his blood he lies, and bites the ground. 
Liris and Pegasus at once she slew: 
The former, as the slacken'd reins he drew 
Of his faint steed; the latter, as he stretch'd 
His arm to prop his friend, the jav'lin reach'd. 
By the same weapon, sent from the same hand, 
Both fall together, and both spurn the sand. 
Amastrus next is added to the slain: 
The rest in rout she follows o'er the plain: 
Tereus, Harpalycus, Demophoon, 
And Chromis, at full speed her fury shun. 
Of all her deadly darts, not one she lost; 
Each was attended with a Trojan ghost. 
Young Ornithus bestrode a hunter steed, 
Swift for the chase, and of Apulian breed. 
Him from afar she spied, in arms unknown: 
O'er his broad back an ox's hide was thrown; 
His helm a wolf, whose gaping jaws were spread 
A cov'ring for his cheeks, and grinn'd around his head, 
He clench'd within his hand an iron prong, 
And tower'd above the rest, conspicuous in the throng. 
Him soon she singled from the flying train, 
And slew with ease; then thus insults the slain: 
"Vain hunter, didst thou think thro' woods to chase 
The savage herd, a vile and trembling race? 
Here cease thy vaunts, and own my victory: 
A woman warrior was too strong for thee. 
Yet, if the ghosts demand the conqu'ror's name, 
Confessing great Camilla, save thy shame." 
Then Butes and Orsilochus she slew, 
The bulkiest bodies of the Trojan crew; 
But Butes breast to breast: the spear descends 
Above the gorget, where his helmet ends, 
And o'er the shield which his left side defends. 
Orsilochus and she their courses ply: 
He seems to follow, and she seems to fly; 
But in a narrower ring she makes the race; 
And then he flies, and she pursues the chase. 
Gath'ring at length on her deluded foe, 
She swings her ax, and rises to the blow 
Full on the helm behind, with such a sway 
The weapon falls, the riven steel gives way: 
He groans, he roars, he sues in vain for grace; 
Brains, mingled with his blood, besmear his face. 
Astonish'd Aunus just arrives by chance, 
To see his fall; nor farther dares advance; 
But, fixing on the horrid maid his eye, 
He stares, and shakes, and finds it vain to fly; 
Yet, like a true Ligurian, born to cheat, 
(At least while fortune favor'd his deceit,) 
Cries out aloud: "What courage have you shown, 
Who trust your courser's strength, and not your own? 
Forego the vantage of your horse, alight, 
And then on equal terms begin the fight: 
It shall be seen, weak woman, what you can, 
When, foot to foot, you combat with a man," 
He said. She glows with anger and disdain, 
Dismounts with speed to dare him on the plain, 
And leaves her horse at large among her train; 
With her drawn sword defies him to the field, 
And, marching, lifts aloft her maiden shield. 
The youth, who thought his cunning did succeed, 
Reins round his horse, and urges all his speed; 
Adds the remembrance of the spur, and hides 
The goring rowels in his bleeding sides. 
"Vain fool, and coward!" cries the lofty maid, 
"Caught in the train which thou thyself hast laid! 
On others practice thy Ligurian arts; 
Thin stratagems and tricks of little hearts 
Are lost on me: nor shalt thou safe retire, 
With vaunting lies, to thy fallacious sire." 
At this, so fast her flying feet she sped, 
That soon she strain'd beyond his horse's head: 
Then turning short, at once she seiz'd the rein, 
And laid the boaster grov'ling on the plain. 
Not with more ease the falcon, from above, 
Trusses in middle air the trembling dove, 
Then plumes the prey, in her strong pounces bound: 
The feathers, foul with blood, come tumbling to the ground.

Now mighty Jove, from his superior height, 
With his broad eye surveys th' unequal fight. 
He fires the breast of Tarchon with disdain, 
And sends him to redeem th' abandon'd plain. 
Betwixt the broken ranks the Tuscan rides, 
And these encourages, and those he chides; 
Recalls each leader, by his name, from flight; 
Renews their ardor, and restores the fight. 
"What panic fear has seiz'd your souls? O shame, 
O brand perpetual of th' Etrurian name! 
Cowards incurable, a woman's hand 
Drives, breaks, and scatters your ignoble band! 
Now cast away the sword, and quit the shield! 
What use of weapons which you dare not wield? 
Not thus you fly your female foes by night, 
Nor shun the feast, when the full bowls invite; 
When to fat off'rings the glad augur calls, 
And the shrill hornpipe sounds to bacchanals. 
These are your studied cares, your lewd delight: 
Swift to debauch, but slow to manly fight." 
Thus having said, he spurs amid the foes, 
Not managing the life he meant to lose. 
The first he found he seiz'd with headlong haste, 
In his strong gripe, and clasp'd around the waist; 
'T was Venulus, whom from his horse he tore, 
And, laid athwart his own, in triumph bore. 
Loud shouts ensue; the Latins turn their eyes, 
And view th' unusual sight with vast surprise. 
The fiery Tarchon, flying o'er the plains, 
Press'd in his arms the pond'rous prey sustains; 
Then, with his shorten'd spear, explores around 
His jointed arms, to fix a deadly wound. 
Nor less the captive struggles for his life: 
He writhes his body to prolong the strife, 
And, fencing for his naked throat, exerts 
His utmost vigor, and the point averts. 
So stoops the yellow eagle from on high, 
And bears a speckled serpent thro' the sky, 
Fast'ning his crooked talons on the prey: 
The pris'ner hisses thro' the liquid way; 
Resists the royal hawk; and, tho' oppress'd, 
She fights in volumes, and erects her crest: 
Turn'd to her foe, she stiffens ev'ry scale, 
And shoots her forky tongue, and whisks her threat'ning tail.

Against the victor, all defense is weak: 
Th' imperial bird still plies her with his beak; 
He tears her bowels, and her breast he gores; 
Then claps his pinions, and securely soars. 
Thus, thro' the midst of circling enemies, 
Strong Tarchon snatch'd and bore away his prize. 
The Tyrrhene troops, that shrunk before, now press 
The Latins, and presume the like success. 
Then Aruns, doom'd to death, his arts assay'd, 
To murther, unespied, the Volscian maid: 
This way and that his winding course he bends, 
And, whereso'er she turns, her steps attends. 
When she retires victorious from the chase, 
He wheels about with care, and shifts his place; 
When, rushing on, she seeks her foes flight, 
He keeps aloof, but keeps her still in sight: 
He threats, and trembles, trying ev'ry way, 
Unseen to kill, and safely to betray. 
Chloreus, the priest of Cybele, from far, 
Glitt'ring in Phrygian arms amidst the war, 
Was by the virgin view'd. The steed he press'd 
Was proud with trappings, and his brawny chest 
With scales of gilded brass was cover'd o'er; 
A robe of Tyrian dye the rider wore. 
With deadly wounds he gall'd the distant foe; 
Gnossian his shafts, and Lycian was his bow: 
A golden helm his front and head surrounds 
A gilded quiver from his shoulder sounds. 
Gold, weav'd with linen, on his thighs he wore, 
With flowers of needlework distinguish'd o'er, 
With golden buckles bound, and gather'd up before. 
Him the fierce maid beheld with ardent eyes, 
Fond and ambitious of so rich a prize, 
Or that the temple might his trophies hold, 
Or else to shine herself in Trojan gold. 
Blind in her haste, she chases him alone. 
And seeks his life, regardless of her own. 
This lucky moment the sly traitor chose: 
Then, starting from his ambush, up he rose, 
And threw, but first to Heav'n address'd his vows: 
"O patron of Socrates' high abodes, 
Phoebus, the ruling pow'r among the gods, 
Whom first we serve, whole woods of unctuous pine 
Are fell'd for thee, and to thy glory shine; 
By thee protected with our naked soles, 
Thro' flames unsing'd we march, and tread the kindled coals

Give me, propitious pow'r, to wash away 
The stains of this dishonorable day: 
Nor spoils, nor triumph, from the fact I claim, 
But with my future actions trust my fame. 
Let me, by stealth, this female plague o'ercome, 
And from the field return inglorious home." 
Apollo heard, and, granting half his pray'r, 
Shuffled in winds the rest, and toss'd in empty air. 
He gives the death desir'd; his safe return 
By southern tempests to the seas is borne. 
Now, when the jav'lin whizz'd along the skies, 
Both armies on Camilla turn'd their eyes, 
Directed by the sound. Of either host, 
Th' unhappy virgin, tho' concern'd the most, 
Was only deaf; so greedy was she bent 
On golden spoils, and on her prey intent; 
Till in her pap the winged weapon stood 
Infix'd, and deeply drunk the purple blood. 
Her sad attendants hasten to sustain 
Their dying lady, drooping on the plain. 
Far from their sight the trembling Aruns flies, 
With beating heart, and fear confus'd with joys; 
Nor dares he farther to pursue his blow, 
Or ev'n to bear the sight of his expiring foe. 
As, when the wolf has torn a bullock's hide 
At unawares, or ranch'd a shepherd's side, 
Conscious of his audacious deed, he flies, 
And claps his quiv'ring tail between his thighs: 
So, speeding once, the wretch no more attends, 
But, spurring forward, herds among his friends. 
She wrench'd the jav'lin with her dying hands, 
But wedg'd within her breast the weapon stands; 
The wood she draws, the steely point remains; 
She staggers in her seat with agonizing pains: 
(A gath'ring mist o'erclouds her cheerful eyes, 
And from her cheeks the rosy color flies:) 
Then turns to her, whom of her female train 
She trusted most, and thus she speaks with pain: 
"Acca, 't is past! he swims before my sight, 
Inexorable Death; and claims his right. 
Bear my last words to Turnus; fly with speed, 
And bid him timely to my charge succeed, 
Repel the Trojans, and the town relieve: 
Farewell! and in this kiss my parting breath receive." 
She said, and, sliding, sunk upon the plain: 
Dying, her open'd hand forsakes the rein; 
Short, and more short, she pants; by slow degrees 
Her mind the passage from her body frees. 
She drops her sword; she nods her plumy crest, 
Her drooping head declining on her breast: 
In the last sigh her struggling soul expires, 
And, murm'ring with disdain, to Stygian sounds retires. 
A shout, that struck the golden stars, ensued; 
Despair and rage the languish'd fight renew'd. 
The Trojan troops and Tuscans, in a line, 
Advance to charge; the mix'd Arcadians join. 
But Cynthia's maid, high seated, from afar 
Surveys the field, and fortune of the war, 
Unmov'd a while, till, prostrate on the plain, 
Welt'ring in blood, she sees Camilla slain, 
And, round her corpse, of friends and foes a fighting train.

Then, from the bottom of her breast, she drew 
A mournful sigh, and these sad words ensue: 
"Too dear a fine, ah much lamented maid, 
For warring with the Trojans, thou hast paid! 
Nor aught avail'd, in this unhappy strife, 
Diana's sacred arms, to save thy life. 
Yet unreveng'd thy goddess will not leave 
Her vot'ry's death, nor; with vain sorrow grieve. 
Branded the wretch, and be his name abhorr'd; 
But after ages shall thy praise record. 
Th' inglorious coward soon shall press the plain: 
Thus vows thy queen, and thus the Fates ordain." 
High o'er the field there stood a hilly mound, 
Sacred the place, and spread with oaks around, 
Where, in a marble tomb, Dercennus lay, 
A king that once in Latium bore the sway. 
The beauteous Opis thither bent her flight, 
To mark the traitor Aruns from the height. 
Him in refulgent arms she soon espied, 
Swoln with success; and loudly thus she cried: 
"Thy backward steps, vain boaster, are too late; 
Turn like a man, at length, and meet thy fate. 
Charg'd with my message, to Camilla go, 
And say I sent thee to the shades below, 
An honor undeserv'd from Cynthia's bow." 
She said, and from her quiver chose with speed 
The winged shaft, predestin'd for the deed; 
Then to the stubborn yew her strength applied, 
Till the far distant horns approach'd on either side. 
The bowstring touch'd her breast, so strong she drew; 
Whizzing in air the fatal arrow flew. 
At once the twanging bow and sounding dart 
The traitor heard, and felt the point within his heart. 
Him, beating with his heels in pangs of death, 
His flying friends to foreign fields bequeath. 
The conqu'ring damsel, with expanded wings, 
The welcome message to her mistress brings. 
Their leader lost, the Volscians quit the field, 
And, unsustain'd, the chiefs of Turnus yield. 
The frighted soldiers, when their captains fly, 
More on their speed than on their strength rely. 
Confus'd in flight, they bear each other down, 
And spur their horses headlong to the town. 
Driv'n by their foes, and to their fears resign'd, 
Not once they turn, but take their wounds behind. 
These drop the shield, and those the lance forego, 
Or on their shoulders bear the slacken'd bow. 
The hoofs of horses, with a rattling sound, 
Beat short and thick, and shake the rotten ground. 
Black clouds of dust come rolling in the sky, 
And o'er the darken'd walls and rampires fly. 
The trembling matrons, from their lofty stands, 
Rend heav'n with female shrieks, and wring their hands. 
All pressing on, pursuers and pursued, 
Are crush'd in crowds, a mingled multitude. 
Some happy few escape: the throng too late 
Rush on for entrance, till they choke the gate. 
Ev'n in the sight of home, the wretched sire 
Looks on, and sees his helpless son expire. 
Then, in a fright, the folding gates they close, 
But leave their friends excluded with their foes. 
The vanquish'd cry; the victors loudly shout; 
'T is terror all within, and slaughter all without. 
Blind in their fear, they bounce against the wall, 
Or, to the moats pursued, precipitate their fall. 
The Latian virgins, valiant with despair, 
Arm'd on the tow'rs, the common danger share: 
So much of zeal their country's cause inspir'd; 
So much Camilla's great example fir'd. 
Poles, sharpen'd in the flames, from high they throw, 
With imitated darts, to gall the foe. 
Their lives for godlike freedom they bequeath, 
And crowd each other to be first in death. 
Meantime to Turnus, ambush'd in the shade, 
With heavy tidings came th' unhappy maid: 
"The Volscians overthrown, Camilla kill'd; 
The foes, entirely masters of the field, 
Like a resistless flood, come rolling on: 
The cry goes off the plain, and thickens to the town." 
Inflam'd with rage, (for so the Furies fire 
The Daunian's breast, and so the Fates require,) 
He leaves the hilly pass, the woods in vain 
Possess'd, and downward issues on the plain. 
Scarce was he gone, when to the straits, now freed 
From secret foes, the Trojan troops succeed. 
Thro' the black forest and the ferny brake, 
Unknowingly secure, their way they take; 
From the rough mountains to the plain descend, 
And there, in order drawn, their line extend. 
Both armies now in open fields are seen; 
Nor far the distance of the space between. 
Both to the city bend. Aeneas sees, 
Thro' smoking fields, his hast'ning enemies; 
And Turnus views the Trojans in array, 
And hears th' approaching horses proudly neigh. 
Soon had their hosts in bloody battle join'd; 
But westward to the sea the sun declin'd. 
Intrench'd before the town both armies lie, 
While Night with sable wings involves the sky. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XII

When Turnus saw the Latins leave the field, 
Their armies broken, and their courage quell'd, 
Himself become the mark of public spite, 
His honor question'd for the promis'd fight; 
The more he was with vulgar hate oppress'd, 
The more his fury boil'd within his breast: 
He rous'd his vigor for the last debate, 
And rais'd his haughty soul to meet his fate. 
As, when the swains the Libyan lion chase, 
He makes a sour retreat, nor mends his pace; 
But, if the pointed jav'lin pierce his side, 
The lordly beast returns with double pride: 
He wrenches out the steel, he roars for pain; 
His sides he lashes, and erects his mane: 
So Turnus fares; his eyeballs flash with fire, 
Thro' his wide nostrils clouds of smoke expire. 
Trembling with rage, around the court he ran, 
At length approach'd the king, and thus began: 
"No more excuses or delays: I stand 
In arms prepar'd to combat, hand to hand, 
This base deserter of his native land. 
The Trojan, by his word, is bound to take 
The same conditions which himself did make. 
Renew the truce; the solemn rites prepare, 
And to my single virtue trust the war. 
The Latians unconcern'd shall see the fight; 
This arm unaided shall assert your right: 
Then, if my prostrate body press the plain, 
To him the crown and beauteous bride remain." 
To whom the king sedately thus replied: 
"Brave youth, the more your valor has been tried, 
The more becomes it us, with due respect, 
To weigh the chance of war, which you neglect. 
You want not wealth, or a successive throne, 
Or cities which your arms have made your own: 
My towns and treasures are at your command, 
And stor'd with blooming beauties is my land; 
Laurentum more than one Lavinia sees, 
Unmarried, fair, of noble families. 
Now let me speak, and you with patience hear, 
Things which perhaps may grate a lover's ear, 
But sound advice, proceeding from a heart 
Sincerely yours, and free from fraudful art. 
The gods, by signs, have manifestly shown, 
No prince Italian born should heir my throne: 
Oft have our augurs, in prediction skill'd, 
And oft our priests, foreign son reveal'd. 
Yet, won by worth that cannot be withstood, 
Brib'd by my kindness to my kindred blood, 
Urg'd by my wife, who would not be denied, 
I promis'd my Lavinia for your bride: 
Her from her plighted lord by force I took; 
All ties of treaties, and of honor, broke: 
On your account I wag'd an impious war- 
With what success, 't is needless to declare; 
I and my subjects feel, and you have had your share. 
Twice vanquish'd while in bloody fields we strive, 
Scarce in our walls we keep our hopes alive: 
The rolling flood runs warm with human gore; 
The bones of Latians blanch the neighb'ring shore. 
Why put I not an end to this debate, 
Still unresolv'd, and still a slave to fate? 
If Turnus' death a lasting peace can give, 
Why should I not procure it whilst you live? 
Should I to doubtful arms your youth betray, 
What would my kinsmen the Rutulians say? 
And, should you fall in fight, (which Heav'n defend!) 
How curse the cause which hasten'd to his end 
The daughter's lover and the father's friend? 
Weigh in your mind the various chance of war; 
Pity your parent's age, and ease his care." 
Such balmy words he pour'd, but all in vain: 
The proffer'd med'cine but provok'd the pain. 
The wrathful youth, disdaining the relief, 
With intermitting sobs thus vents his grief: 
"The care, O best of fathers, which you take 
For my concerns, at my desire forsake. 
Permit me not to languish out my days, 
But make the best exchange of life for praise. 
This arm, this lance, can well dispute the prize; 
And the blood follows, where the weapon flies. 
His goddess mother is not near, to shroud 
The flying coward with an empty cloud." 
But now the queen, who fear'd for Turnus' life, 
And loath'd the hard conditions of the strife, 
Held him by force; and, dying in his death, 
In these sad accents gave her sorrow breath: 
"O Turnus, I adjure thee by these tears, 
And whate'er price Amata's honor bears 
Within thy breast, since thou art all my hope, 
My sickly mind's repose, my sinking age's prop; 
Since on the safety of thy life alone 
Depends Latinus, and the Latian throne: 
Refuse me not this one, this only pray'r, 
To waive the combat, and pursue the war. 
Whatever chance attends this fatal strife, 
Think it includes, in thine, Amata's life. 
I cannot live a slave, or see my throne 
Usurp'd by strangers or a Trojan son." 
At this, a flood of tears Lavinia shed; 
A crimson blush her beauteous face o'erspread, 
Varying her cheeks by turns with white and red. 
The driving colors, never at a stay, 
Run here and there, and flush, and fade away. 
Delightful change! Thus Indian iv'ry shows, 
Which with the bord'ring paint of purple glows; 
Or lilies damask'd by the neighb'ring rose. 
The lover gaz'd, and, burning with desire, 
The more he look'd, the more he fed the fire: 
Revenge, and jealous rage, and secret spite, 
Roll in his breast, and rouse him to the fight. 
Then fixing on the queen his ardent eyes, 
Firm to his first intent, he thus replies: 
"O mother, do not by your tears prepare 
Such boding omens, and prejudge the war. 
Resolv'd on fight, I am no longer free 
To shun my death, if Heav'n my death decree." 
Then turning to the herald, thus pursues: 
"Go, greet the Trojan with ungrateful news; 
Denounce from me, that, when to-morrow's light 
Shall gild the heav'ns, he need not urge the fight; 
The Trojan and Rutulian troops no more 
Shall dye, with mutual blood, the Latian shore: 
Our single swords the quarrel shall decide, 
And to the victor be the beauteous bride." 
He said, and striding on, with speedy pace, 
He sought his coursers of the Thracian race. 
At his approach they toss their heads on high, 
And, proudly neighing, promise victory. 
The sires of these Orythia sent from far, 
To grace Pilumnus, when he went to war. 
The drifts of Thracian snows were scarce so white, 
Nor northern winds in fleetness match'd their flight. 
Officious grooms stand ready by his side; 
And some with combs their flowing manes divide, 
And others stroke their chests and gently soothe their pride

He sheath'd his limbs in arms; a temper'd mass 
Of golden metal those, and mountain brass. 
Then to his head his glitt'ring helm he tied, 
And girt his faithful fauchion to his side. 
In his Aetnaean forge, the God of Fire 
That fauchion labor'd for the hero's sire; 
Immortal keenness on the blade bestow'd, 
And plung'd it hissing in the Stygian flood. 
Propp'd on a pillar, which the ceiling bore, 
Was plac'd the lance Auruncan Actor wore; 
Which with such force he brandish'd in his hand, 
The tough ash trembled like an osier wand: 
Then cried: "O pond'rous spoil of Actor slain, 
And never yet by Turnus toss'd in vain, 
Fail not this day thy wonted force; but go, 
Sent by this hand, to pierce the Trojan foe! 
Give me to tear his corslet from his breast, 
And from that eunuch head to rend the crest; 
Dragg'd in the dust, his frizzled hair to soil, 
Hot from the vexing ir'n, and smear'd with fragrant oil!"

Thus while he raves, from his wide nostrils flies 
A fiery steam, and sparkles from his eyes. 
So fares the bull in his lov'd female's sight: 
Proudly he bellows, and preludes the fight; 
He tries his goring horns against a tree, 
And meditates his absent enemy; 
He pushes at the winds; he digs the strand 
With his black hoofs, and spurns the yellow sand. 
Nor less the Trojan, in his Lemnian arms, 
To future fight his manly courage warms: 
He whets his fury, and with joy prepares 
To terminate at once the ling'ring wars; 
To cheer his chiefs and tender son, relates 
What Heav'n had promis'd, and expounds the fates. 
Then to the Latian king he sends, to cease 
The rage of arms, and ratify the peace. 
The morn ensuing, from the mountain's height, 
Had scarcely spread the skies with rosy light; 
Th' ethereal coursers, bounding from the sea, 
From out their flaming nostrils breath'd the day; 
When now the Trojan and Rutulian guard, 
In friendly labor join'd, the list prepar'd. 
Beneath the walls they measure out the space; 
Then sacred altars rear, on sods of grass, 
Where, with religious their common gods they place. 
In purest white the priests their heads attire; 
And living waters bear, and holy fire; 
And, o'er their linen hoods and shaded hair, 
Long twisted wreaths of sacred veryain wear, 
In order issuing from the town appears 
The Latin legion, arm'd with pointed spears; 
And from the fields, advancing on a line, 
The Trojan and the Tuscan forces join: 
Their various arms afford a pleasing sight; 
A peaceful train they seem, in peace prepar'd for fight.

Betwixt the ranks the proud commanders ride, 
Glitt'ring with gold, and vests in purple dyed; 
Here Mnestheus, author of the Memmian line, 
And there Messapus, born of seed divine. 
The sign is giv'n; and, round the listed space, 
Each man in order fills his proper place. 
Reclining on their ample shields, they stand, 
And fix their pointed lances in the sand. 
Now, studious of the sight, a num'rous throng 
Of either sex promiscuous, old and young, 
Swarm the town: by those who rest behind, 
The gates and walls and houses' tops are lin'd. 
Meantime the Queen of Heav'n beheld the sight, 
With eyes unpleas'd, from Mount Albano's height 
(Since call'd Albano by succeeding fame, 
But then an empty hill, without a name). 
She thence survey'd the field, the Trojan pow'rs, 
The Latian squadrons, and Laurentine tow'rs. 
Then thus the goddess of the skies bespoke, 
With sighs and tears, the goddess of the lake, 
King Turnus' sister, once a lovely maid, 
Ere to the lust of lawless Jove betray'd: 
Compress'd by force, but, by the grateful god, 
Now made the Nais of the neighb'ring flood. 
"O nymph, the pride of living lakes," said she, 
"O most renown'd, and most belov'd by me, 
Long hast thou known, nor need I to record, 
The wanton sallies of my wand'ring lord. 
Of ev'ry Latian fair whom Jove misled 
To mount by stealth my violated bed, 
To thee alone I grudg'd not his embrace, 
But gave a part of heav'n, and an unenvied place. 
Now learn from me thy near approaching grief, 
Nor think my wishes want to thy relief. 
While fortune favor'd, nor Heav'n's King denied 
To lend my succor to the Latian side, 
I sav'd thy brother, and the sinking state: 
But now he struggles with unequal fate, 
And goes, with gods averse, o'ermatch'd in might, 
To meet inevitable death in fight; 
Nor must I break the truce, nor can sustain the sight. 
Thou, if thou dar'st thy present aid supply; 
It well becomes a sister's care to try." 
At this the lovely nymph, with grief oppress'd, 
Thrice tore her hair, and beat her comely breast. 
To whom Saturnia thus: "Thy tears are late: 
Haste, snatch him, if he can be snatch'd from fate: 
New tumults kindle; violate the truce: 
Who knows what changeful fortune may produce? 
'T is not a crime t' attempt what I decree; 
Or, if it were, discharge the crime on me." 
She said, and, sailing on the winged wind, 
Left the sad nymph suspended in her mind. 
And now pomp the peaceful kings appear: 
Four steeds the chariot of Latinus bear; 
Twelve golden beams around his temples play, 
To mark his lineage from the God of Day. 
Two snowy coursers Turnus' chariot yoke, 
And in his hand two massy spears he shook: 
Then issued from the camp, in arms divine, 
Aeneas, author of the Roman line; 
And by his side Ascanius took his place, 
The second hope of Rome's immortal race. 
Adorn'd in white, a rev'rend priest appears, 
And off'rings to the flaming altars bears; 
A porket, and a lamb that never suffer'd shears. 
Then to the rising sun he turns his eyes, 
And strews the beasts, design'd for sacrifice, 
With salt and meal: with like officious care 
He marks their foreheads, and he clips their hair. 
Betwixt their horns the purple wine he sheds; 
With the same gen'rous juice the flame he feeds. 
Aeneas then unsheath'd his shining sword, 
And thus with pious pray'rs the gods ador'd: 
"All-seeing sun, and thou, Ausonian soil, 
For which I have sustain'd so long a toil, 
Thou, King of Heav'n, and thou, the Queen of Air, 
Propitious now, and reconcil'd by pray'r; 
Thou, God of War, whose unresisted sway 
The labors and events of arms obey; 
Ye living fountains, and ye running floods, 
All pow'rs of ocean, all ethereal gods, 
Hear, and bear record: if I fall in field, 
Or, recreant in the fight, to Turnus yield, 
My Trojans shall encrease Evander's town; 
Ascanius shall renounce th' Ausonian crown: 
All claims, all questions of debate, shall cease; 
Nor he, nor they, with force infringe the peace. 
But, if my juster arms prevail in fight, 
(As sure they shall, if I divine aright,) 
My Trojans shall not o'er th' Italians reign: 
Both equal, both unconquer'd shall remain, 
Join'd in their laws, their lands, and their abodes; 
I ask but altars for my weary gods. 
The care of those religious rites be mine; 
The crown to King Latinus I resign: 
His be the sov'reign sway. Nor will I share 
His pow'r in peace, or his command in war. 
For me, my friends another town shall frame, 
And bless the rising tow'rs with fair Lavinia's name." 
Thus he. Then, with erected eyes and hands, 
The Latian king before his altar stands. 
"By the same heav'n," said he, "and earth, and main, 
And all the pow'rs that all the three contain; 
By hell below, and by that upper god 
Whose thunder signs the peace, who seals it with his nod;

So let Latona's double offspring hear, 
And double-fronted Janus, what I swear: 
I touch the sacred altars, touch the flames, 
And all those pow'rs attest, and all their names; 
Whatever chance befall on either side, 
No term of time this union shall divide: 
No force, no fortune, shall my vows unbind, 
Or shake the steadfast tenor of my mind; 
Not tho' the circling seas should break their bound, 
O'erflow the shores, or sap the solid ground; 
Not tho' the lamps of heav'n their spheres forsake, 
Hurl'd down, and hissing in the nether lake: 
Ev'n as this royal scepter" (for he bore 
A scepter in his hand) "shall never more 
Shoot out in branches, or renew the birth: 
An orphan now, cut from the mother earth 
By the keen ax, dishonor'd of its hair, 
And cas'd in brass, for Latian kings to bear." 
When thus in public view the peace was tied 
With solemn vows, and sworn on either side, 
All dues perform'd which holy rites require; 
The victim beasts are slain before the fire, 
The trembling entrails from their bodies torn, 
And to the fatten'd flames in chargers borne. 
Already the Rutulians deem their man 
O'ermatch'd in arms, before the fight began. 
First rising fears are whisper'd thro' the crowd; 
Then, gath'ring sound, they murmur more aloud. 
Now, side to side, they measure with their eyes 
The champions' bulk, their sinews, and their size: 
The nearer they approach, the more is known 
Th' apparent disadvantage of their own. 
Turnus himself appears in public sight 
Conscious of fate, desponding of the fight. 
Slowly he moves, and at his altar stands 
With eyes dejected, and with trembling hands; 
And, while he mutters undistinguish'd pray'rs, 
A livid deadness in his cheeks appears. 
With anxious pleasure when Juturna view'd 
Th' increasing fright of the mad multitude, 
When their short sighs and thick'ning sobs she heard, 
And found their ready minds for change prepar'd; 
Dissembling her immortal form, she took 
Camertus' mien, his habit, and his look; 
A chief of ancient blood; in arms well known 
Was his great sire, and he his greater son. 
His shape assum'd, amid the ranks she ran, 
And humoring their first motions, thus began: 
"For shame, Rutulians, can you bear the sight 
Of one expos'd for all, in single fight? 
Can we, before the face of heav'n, confess 
Our courage colder, or our numbers less? 
View all the Trojan host, th' Arcadian band, 
And Tuscan army; count 'em as they stand: 
Undaunted to the battle if we go, 
Scarce ev'ry second man will share a foe. 
Turnus, 't is true, in this unequal strife, 
Shall lose, with honor, his devoted life, 
Or change it rather for immortal fame, 
Succeeding to the gods, from whence he came: 
But you, a servile and inglorious band, 
For foreign lords shall sow your native land, 
Those fruitful fields your fighting fathers gain'd, 
Which have so long their lazy sons sustain'd." 
With words like these, she carried her design: 
A rising murmur runs along the line. 
Then ev'n the city troops, and Latians, tir'd 
With tedious war, seem with new souls inspir'd: 
Their champion's fate with pity they lament, 
And of the league, so lately sworn, repent. 
Nor fails the goddess to foment the rage 
With lying wonders, and a false presage; 
But adds a sign, which, present to their eyes, 
Inspires new courage, and a glad surprise. 
For, sudden, in the fiery tracts above, 
Appears in pomp th' imperial bird of Jove: 
A plump of fowl he spies, that swim the lakes, 
And o'er their heads his sounding pinions shakes; 
Then, stooping on the fairest of the train, 
In his strong talons truss'd a silver swan. 
Th' Italians wonder at th' unusual sight; 
But, while he lags, and labors in his flight, 
Behold, the dastard fowl return anew, 
And with united force the foe pursue: 
Clam'rous around the royal hawk they fly, 
And, thick'ning in a cloud, o'ershade the sky. 
They cuff, they scratch, they cross his airy course; 
Nor can th' incumber'd bird sustain their force; 
But vex'd, not vanquish'd, drops the pond'rous prey, 
And, lighten'd of his burthen, wings his way. 
Th' Ausonian bands with shouts salute the sight, 
Eager of action, and demand the fight. 
Then King Tolumnius, vers'd in augurs' arts, 
Cries out, and thus his boasted skill imparts: 
"At length 't is granted, what I long desir'd! 
This, this is what my frequent vows requir'd. 
Ye gods, I take your omen, and obey. 
Advance, my friends, and charge! I lead the way. 
These are the foreign foes, whose impious band, 
Like that rapacious bird, infest our land: 
But soon, like him, they shall be forc'd to sea 
By strength united, and forego the prey. 
Your timely succor to your country bring, 
Haste to the rescue, and redeem your king." 
He said; and, pressing onward thro' the crew, 
Pois'd in his lifted arm, his lance he threw. 
The winged weapon, whistling in the wind, 
Came driving on, nor miss'd the mark design'd. 
At once the cornel rattled in the skies; 
At once tumultuous shouts and clamors rise. 
Nine brothers in a goodly band there stood, 
Born of Arcadian mix'd with Tuscan blood, 
Gylippus' sons: the fatal jav'lin flew, 
Aim'd at the midmost of the friendly crew. 
A passage thro' the jointed arms it found, 
Just where the belt was to the body bound, 
And struck the gentle youth extended on the ground. 
Then, fir'd with pious rage, the gen'rous train 
Run madly forward to revenge the slain. 
And some with eager haste their jav'lins throw; 
And some with sword in hand assault the foe. 
The wish'd insult the Latine troops embrace, 
And meet their ardor in the middle space. 
The Trojans, Tuscans, and Arcadian line, 
With equal courage obviate their design. 
Peace leaves the violated fields, and hate 
Both armies urges to their mutual fate. 
With impious haste their altars are o'erturn'd, 
The sacrifice half-broil'd, and half-unburn'd. 
Thick storms of steel from either army fly, 
And clouds of clashing darts obscure the sky; 
Brands from the fire are missive weapons made, 
With chargers, bowls, and all the priestly trade. 
Latinus, frighted, hastens from the fray, 
And bears his unregarded gods away. 
These on their horses vault; those yoke the car; 
The rest, with swords on high, run headlong to the war. 
Messapus, eager to confound the peace, 
Spurr'd his hot courser thro' the fighting prease, 
At King Aulestes, by his purple known 
A Tuscan prince, and by his regal crown; 
And, with a shock encount'ring, bore him down. 
Backward he fell; and, as his fate design'd, 
The ruins of an altar were behind: 
There, pitching on his shoulders and his head, 
Amid the scatt'ring fires he lay supinely spread. 
The beamy spear, descending from above, 
His cuirass pierc'd, and thro' his body drove. 
Then, with a scornful smile, the victor cries: 
"The gods have found a fitter sacrifice." 
Greedy of spoils, th' Italians strip the dead 
Of his rich armor, and uncrown his head. 
Priest Corynaeus, arm'd his better hand, 
From his own altar, with a blazing brand; 
And, as Ebusus with a thund'ring pace 
Advanc'd to battle, dash'd it on his face: 
His bristly beard shines out with sudden fires; 
The crackling crop a noisome scent expires. 
Following the blow, he seiz'd his curling crown 
With his left hand; his other cast him down. 
The prostrate body with his knees he press'd, 
And plung'd his holy poniard in his breast. 
While Podalirius, with his sword, pursued 
The shepherd Alsus thro' the flying crowd, 
Swiftly he turns, and aims a deadly blow 
Full on the front of his unwary foe. 
The broad ax enters with a crashing sound, 
And cleaves the chin with one continued wound; 
Warm blood, and mingled brains, besmear his arms around 
An iron sleep his stupid eyes oppress'd, 
And seal'd their heavy lids in endless rest. 
But good Aeneas rush'd amid the bands; 
Bare was his head, and naked were his hands, 
In sign of truce: then thus he cries aloud: 
"What sudden rage, what new desire of blood, 
Inflames your alter'd minds? O Trojans, cease 
From impious arms, nor violate the peace! 
By human sanctions, and by laws divine, 
The terms are all agreed; the war is mine. 
Dismiss your fears, and let the fight ensue; 
This hand alone shall right the gods and you: 
Our injur'd altars, and their broken vow, 
To this avenging sword the faithless Turnus owe." 
Thus while he spoke, unmindful of defense, 
A winged arrow struck the pious prince. 
But, whether from some human hand it came, 
Or hostile god, is left unknown by fame: 
No human hand or hostile god was found, 
To boast the triumph of so base a wound. 
When Turnus saw the Trojan quit the plain, 
His chiefs dismay'd, his troops a fainting train, 
Th' unhop'd event his heighten'd soul inspires: 
At once his arms and coursers he requires; 
Then, with a leap, his lofty chariot gains, 
And with a ready hand assumes the reins. 
He drives impetuous, and, where'er he goes, 
He leaves behind a lane of slaughter'd foes. 
These his lance reaches; over those he rolls 
His rapid car, and crushes out their souls: 
In vain the vanquish'd fly; the victor sends 
The dead men's weapons at their living friends. 
Thus, on the banks of Hebrus' freezing flood, 
The God of Battles, in his angry mood, 
Clashing his sword against his brazen shield, 
Let loose the reins, and scours along the field: 
Before the wind his fiery coursers fly; 
Groans the sad earth, resounds the rattling sky. 
Wrath, Terror, Treason, Tumult, and Despair 
(Dire faces, and deform'd) surround the car; 
Friends of the god, and followers of the war. 
With fury not unlike, nor less disdain, 
Exulting Turnus flies along the plain: 
His smoking horses, at their utmost speed, 
He lashes on, and urges o'er the dead. 
Their fetlocks run with blood; and, when they bound, 
The gore and gath'ring dust are dash'd around. 
Thamyris and Pholus, masters of the war, 
He kill'd at hand, but Sthenelus afar: 
From far the sons of Imbracus he slew, 
Glaucus and Lades, of the Lycian crew; 
Both taught to fight on foot, in battle join'd, 
Or mount the courser that outstrips the wind. 
Meantime Eumedes, vaunting in the field, 
New fir'd the Trojans, and their foes repell'd. 
This son of Dolon bore his grandsire's name, 
But emulated more his father's fame; 
His guileful father, sent a nightly spy, 
The Grecian camp and order to descry: 
Hard enterprise! and well he might require 
Achilles' car and horses, for his hire: 
But, met upon the scout, th' Aetolian prince 
In death bestow'd a juster recompense. 
Fierce Turnus view'd the Trojan from afar, 
And launch'd his jav'lin from his lofty car; 
Then lightly leaping down, pursued the blow, 
And, pressing with his foot his prostrate foe, 
Wrench'd from his feeble hold the shining sword, 
And plung'd it in the bosom of its lord. 
"Possess," said he, "the fruit of all thy pains, 
And measure, at thy length, our Latian plains. 
Thus are my foes rewarded by my hand; 
Thus may they build their town, and thus enjoy the land!"

Then Dares, Butes, Sybaris he slew, 
Whom o'er his neck his flound'ring courser threw. 
As when loud Boreas, with his blust'ring train, 
Stoops from above, incumbent on the main; 
Where'er he flies, he drives the rack before, 
And rolls the billows on th' Aegaean shore: 
So, where resistless Turnus takes his course, 
The scatter'd squadrons bend before his force; 
His crest of horses' hair is blown behind 
By adverse air, and rustles in the wind. 
This haughty Phegeus saw with high disdain, 
And, as the chariot roll'd along the plain, 
Light from the ground he leapt, and seiz'd the rein. 
Thus hung in air, he still retain'd his hold, 
The coursers frighted, and their course controll'd. 
The lance of Turnus reach'd him as he hung, 
And pierc'd his plated arms, but pass'd along, 
And only raz'd the skin. He turn'd, and held 
Against his threat'ning foe his ample shield; 
Then call'd for aid: but, while he cried in vain, 
The chariot bore him backward on the plain. 
He lies revers'd; the victor king descends, 
And strikes so justly where his helmet ends, 
He lops the head. The Latian fields are drunk 
With streams that issue from the bleeding trunk. 
While he triumphs, and while the Trojans yield, 
The wounded prince is forc'd to leave the field: 
Strong Mnestheus, and Achates often tried, 
And young Ascanius, weeping by his side, 
Conduct him to his tent. Scarce can he rear 
His limbs from earth, supported on his spear. 
Resolv'd in mind, regardless of the smart, 
He tugs with both his hands, and breaks the dart. 
The steel remains. No readier way he found 
To draw the weapon, than t' inlarge the wound. 
Eager of fight, impatient of delay, 
He begs; and his unwilling friends obey. 
Iapis was at hand to prove his art, 
Whose blooming youth so fir'd Apollo's heart, 
That, for his love, he proffer'd to bestow 
His tuneful harp and his unerring bow. 
The pious youth, more studious how to save 
His aged sire, now sinking to the grave, 
Preferr'd the pow'r of plants, and silent praise 
Of healing arts, before Phoebean bays. 
Propp'd on his lance the pensive hero stood, 
And heard and saw, unmov'd, the mourning crowd. 
The fam'd physician tucks his robes around 
With ready hands, and hastens to the wound. 
With gentle touches he performs his part, 
This way and that, soliciting the dart, 
And exercises all his heav'nly art. 
All soft'ning simples, known of sov'reign use, 
He presses out, and pours their noble juice. 
These first infus'd, to lenify the pain, 
He tugs with pincers, but he tugs in vain. 
Then to the patron of his art he pray'd: 
The patron of his art refus'd his aid. 
Meantime the war approaches to the tents; 
Th' alarm grows hotter, and the noise augments: 
The driving dust proclaims the danger near; 
And first their friends, and then their foes appear: 
Their friends retreat; their foes pursue the rear. 
The camp is fill'd with terror and affright: 
The hissing shafts within the trench alight; 
An undistinguish'd noise ascends the sky, 
The shouts those who kill, and groans of those who die. 
But now the goddess mother, mov'd with grief, 
And pierc'd with pity, hastens her relief. 
A branch of healing dittany she brought, 
Which in the Cretan fields with care she sought: 
Rough is the stern, which woolly leafs surround; 
The leafs with flow'rs, the flow'rs with purple crown'd,

Well known to wounded goats; a sure relief 
To draw the pointed steel, and ease the grief. 
This Venus brings, in clouds involv'd, and brews 
Th' extracted liquor with ambrosian dews, 
And odorous panacee. Unseen she stands, 
Temp'ring the mixture with her heav'nly hands, 
And pours it in a bowl, already crown'd 
With juice of med'c'nal herbs prepar'd to bathe the wound.

The leech, unknowing of superior art 
Which aids the cure, with this foments the part; 
And in a moment ceas'd the raging smart. 
Stanch'd is the blood, and in the bottom stands: 
The steel, but scarcely touch'd with tender hands, 
Moves up, and follows of its own accord, 
And health and vigor are at once restor'd. 
Iapis first perceiv'd the closing wound, 
And first the footsteps of a god he found. 
"Arms! arms!" he cries; "the sword and shield prepare, 
And send the willing chief, renew'd, to war. 
This is no mortal work, no cure of mine, 
Nor art's effect, but done by hands divine. 
Some god our general to the battle sends; 
Some god preserves his life for greater ends." 
The hero arms in haste; his hands infold 
His thighs with cuishes of refulgent gold: 
Inflam'd to fight, and rushing to the field, 
That hand sustaining the celestial shield, 
This gripes the lance, and with such vigor shakes, 
That to the rest the beamy weapon quakes. 
Then with a close embrace he strain'd his son, 
And, kissing thro' his helmet, thus begun: 
"My son, from my example learn the war, 
In camps to suffer, and in fields to dare; 
But happier chance than mine attend thy care! 
This day my hand thy tender age shall shield, 
And crown with honors of the conquer'd field: 
Thou, when thy riper years shall send thee forth 
To toils of war, be mindful of my worth; 
Assert thy birthright, and in arms be known, 
For Hector's nephew, and Aeneas' son." 
He said; and, striding, issued on the plain. 
Anteus and Mnestheus, and a num'rous train, 
Attend his steps; the rest their weapons take, 
And, crowding to the field, the camp forsake. 
A cloud of blinding dust is rais'd around, 
Labors beneath their feet the trembling ground. 
Now Turnus, posted on a hill, from far 
Beheld the progress of the moving war: 
With him the Latins view'd the cover'd plains, 
And the chill blood ran backward in their veins. 
Juturna saw th' advancing troops appear, 
And heard the hostile sound, and fled for fear. 
Aeneas leads; and draws a sweeping train, 
Clos'd in their ranks, and pouring on the plain. 
As when a whirlwind, rushing to the shore 
From the mid ocean, drives the waves before; 
The painful hind with heavy heart foresees 
The flatted fields, and slaughter of the trees; 
With like impetuous rage the prince appears 
Before his doubled front, nor less destruction bears. 
And now both armies shock in open field; 
Osiris is by strong Thymbraeus kill'd. 
Archetius, Ufens, Epulon, are slain 
(All fam'd in arms, and of the Latian train) 
By Gyas', Mnestheus', and Achates' hand. 
The fatal augur falls, by whose command 
The truce was broken, and whose lance, embrued 
With Trojan blood, th' unhappy fight renew'd. 
Loud shouts and clamors rend the liquid sky, 
And o'er the field the frighted Latins fly. 
The prince disdains the dastards to pursue, 
Nor moves to meet in arms the fighting few; 
Turnus alone, amid the dusky plain, 
He seeks, and to the combat calls in vain. 
Juturna heard, and, seiz'd with mortal fear, 
Forc'd from the beam her brother's charioteer; 
Assumes his shape, his armor, and his mien, 
And, like Metiscus, in his seat is seen. 
As the black swallow near the palace plies; 
O'er empty courts, and under arches, flies; 
Now hawks aloft, now skims along the flood, 
To furnish her loquacious nest with food: 
So drives the rapid goddess o'er the plains; 
The smoking horses run with loosen'd reins. 
She steers a various course among the foes; 
Now here, now there, her conqu'ring brother shows; 
Now with a straight, now with a wheeling flight, 
She turns, and bends, but shuns the single fight. 
Aeneas, fir'd with fury, breaks the crowd, 
And seeks his foe, and calls by name aloud: 
He runs within a narrower ring, and tries 
To stop the chariot; but the chariot flies. 
If he but gain a glimpse, Juturna fears, 
And far away the Daunian hero bears. 
What should he do! Nor arts nor arms avail; 
And various cares in vain his mind assail. 
The great Messapus, thund'ring thro' the field, 
In his left hand two pointed jav'lins held: 
Encount'ring on the prince, one dart he drew, 
And with unerring aim and utmost vigor threw. 
Aeneas saw it come, and, stooping low 
Beneath his buckler, shunn'd the threat'ning blow. 
The weapon hiss'd above his head, and tore 
The waving plume which on his helm he wore. 
Forced by this hostile act, and fir'd with spite, 
That flying Turnus still declin'd the fight, 
The Prince, whose piety had long repell'd 
His inborn ardor, now invades the field; 
Invokes the pow'rs of violated peace, 
Their rites and injur'd altars to redress; 
Then, to his rage abandoning the rein, 
With blood and slaughter'd bodies fills the plain. 
What god can tell, what numbers can display, 
The various labors of that fatal day; 
What chiefs and champions fell on either side, 
In combat slain, or by what deaths they died; 
Whom Turnus, whom the Trojan hero kill'd; 
Who shar'd the fame and fortune of the field! 
Jove, could'st thou view, and not avert thy sight, 
Two jarring nations join'd in cruel fight, 
Whom leagues of lasting love so shortly shall unite! 
Aeneas first Rutulian Sucro found, 
Whose valor made the Trojans quit their ground; 
Betwixt his ribs the jav'lin drove so just, 
It reach'd his heart, nor needs a second thrust. 
Now Turnus, at two blows, two brethren slew; 
First from his horse fierce Amycus he threw: 
Then, leaping on the ground, on foot assail'd 
Diores, and in equal fight prevail'd. 
Their lifeless trunks he leaves upon the place; 
Their heads, distilling gore, his chariot grace. 
Three cold on earth the Trojan hero threw, 
Whom without respite at one charge he slew: 
Cethegus, Tanais, Tagus, fell oppress'd, 
And sad Onythes, added to the rest, 
Of Theban blood, whom Peridia bore. 
Turnus two brothers from the Lycian shore, 
And from Apollo's fane to battle sent, 
O'erthrew; nor Phoebus could their fate prevent. 
Peaceful Menoetes after these he kill'd, 
Who long had shunn'd the dangers of the field: 
On Lerna's lake a silent life he led, 
And with his nets and angle earn'd his bread; 
Nor pompous cares, nor palaces, he knew, 
But wisely from th' infectious world withdrew: 
Poor was his house; his father's painful hand 
Discharg'd his rent, and plow'd another's land. 
As flames among the lofty woods are thrown 
On diff'rent sides, and both by winds are blown; 
The laurels crackle in the sputt'ring fire; 
The frighted sylvans from their shades retire: 
Or as two neighb'ring torrents fall from high; 
Rapid they run; the foamy waters fry; 
They roll to sea with unresisted force, 
And down the rocks precipitate their course: 
Not with less rage the rival heroes take 
Their diff'rent ways, nor less destruction make. 
With spears afar, with swords at hand, they strike; 
And zeal of slaughter fires their souls alike. 
Like them, their dauntless men maintain the field; 
And hearts are pierc'd, unknowing how to yield: 
They blow for blow return, and wound for wound; 
And heaps of bodies raise the level ground. 
Murranus, boasting of his blood, that springs 
From a long royal race of Latian kings, 
Is by the Trojan from his chariot thrown, 
Crush'd with the weight of an unwieldy stone: 
Betwixt the wheels he fell; the wheels, that bore 
His living load, his dying body tore. 
His starting steeds, to shun the glitt'ring sword, 
Paw down his trampled limbs, forgetful of their lord. 
Fierce Hyllus threaten'd high, and, face to face, 
Affronted Turnus in the middle space: 
The prince encounter'd him in full career, 
And at his temples aim'd the deadly spear; 
So fatally the flying weapon sped, 
That thro' his helm it pierc'd his head. 
Nor, Cisseus, couldst thou scape from Turnus' hand, 
In vain the strongest of th' Arcadian band: 
Nor to Cupentus could his gods afford 
Availing aid against th' Aenean sword, 
Which to his naked heart pursued the course; 
Nor could his plated shield sustain the force. 
Iolas fell, whom not the Grecian pow'rs, 
Nor great subverter of the Trojan tow'rs, 
Were doom'd to kill, while Heav'n prolong'd his date; 
But who can pass the bounds, prefix'd by fate? 
In high Lyrnessus, and in Troy, he held 
Two palaces, and was from each expell'd: 
Of all the mighty man, the last remains 
A little spot of foreign earth contains. 
And now both hosts their broken troops unite 
In equal ranks, and mix in mortal fight. 
Seresthus and undaunted Mnestheus join 
The Trojan, Tuscan, and Arcadian line: 
Sea-born Messapus, with Atinas, heads 
The Latin squadrons, and to battle leads. 
They strike, they push, they throng the scanty space, 
Resolv'd on death, impatient of disgrace; 
And, where one falls, another fills his place. 
The Cyprian goddess now inspires her son 
To leave th' unfinish'd fight, and storm the town: 
For, while he rolls his eyes around the plain 
In quest of Turnus, whom he seeks in vain, 
He views th' unguarded city from afar, 
In careless quiet, and secure of war. 
Occasion offers, and excites his mind 
To dare beyond the task he first design'd. 
Resolv'd, he calls his chiefs; they leave the fight: 
Attended thus, he takes a neighb'ring height; 
The crowding troops about their gen'ral stand, 
All under arms, and wait his high command. 
Then thus the lofty prince: "Hear and obey, 
Ye Trojan bands, without the least delay 
Jove is with us; and what I have decreed 
Requires our utmost vigor, and our speed. 
Your instant arms against the town prepare, 
The source of mischief, and the seat of war. 
This day the Latian tow'rs, that mate the sky, 
Shall level with the plain in ashes lie: 
The people shall be slaves, unless in time 
They kneel for pardon, and repent their crime. 
Twice have our foes been vanquish'd on the plain: 
Then shall I wait till Turnus will be slain? 
Your force against the perjur'd city bend. 
There it began, and there the war shall end. 
The peace profan'd our rightful arms requires; 
Cleanse the polluted place with purging fires." 
He finish'd; and, one soul inspiring all, 
Form'd in a wedge, the foot approach the wall. 
Without the town, an unprovided train 
Of gaping, gazing citizens are slain. 
Some firebrands, others scaling ladders bear, 
And those they toss aloft, and these they rear: 
The flames now launch'd, the feather'd arrows fly, 
And clouds of missive arms obscure the sky. 
Advancing to the front, the hero stands, 
And, stretching out to heav'n his pious hands, 
Attests the gods, asserts his innocence, 
Upbraids with breach of faith th' Ausonian prince; 
Declares the royal honor doubly stain'd, 
And twice the rites of holy peace profan'd. 
Dissenting clamors in the town arise; 
Each will be heard, and all at once advise. 
One part for peace, and one for war contends; 
Some would exclude their foes, and some admit their friends.

The helpless king is hurried in the throng, 
And, whate'er tide prevails, is borne along. 
Thus, when the swain, within a hollow rock, 
Invades the bees with suffocating smoke, 
They run around, or labor on their wings, 
Disus'd to flight, and shoot their sleepy stings; 
To shun the bitter fumes in vain they try; 
Black vapors, issuing from the vent, involve the sky. 
But fate and envious fortune now prepare 
To plunge the Latins in the last despair. 
The queen, who saw the foes invade the town, 
And brands on tops of burning houses thrown, 
Cast round her eyes, distracted with her fear- 
No troops of Turnus in the field appear. 
Once more she stares abroad, but still in vain, 
And then concludes the royal youth is slain. 
Mad with her anguish, impotent to bear 
The mighty grief, she loathes the vital air. 
She calls herself the cause of all this ill, 
And owns the dire effects of her ungovern'd will; 
She raves against the gods; she beats her breast; 
She tears with both her hands her purple vest: 
Then round a beam a running noose she tied, 
And, fasten'd by the neck, obscenely died. 
Soon as the fatal news by Fame was blown, 
And to her dames and to her daughter known, 
The sad Lavinia rends her yellow hair 
And rosy cheeks; the rest her sorrow share: 
With shrieks the palace rings, and madness of despair. 
The spreading rumor fills the public place: 
Confusion, fear, distraction, and disgrace, 
And silent shame, are seen in ev'ry face. 
Latinus tears his garments as he goes, 
Both for his public and his private woes; 
With filth his venerable beard besmears, 
And sordid dust deforms his silver hairs. 
And much he blames the softness of his mind, 
Obnoxious to the charms of womankind, 
And soon seduc'd to change what he so well design'd; 
To break the solemn league so long desir'd, 
Nor finish what his fates, and those of Troy, requir'd. 
Now Turnus rolls aloof o'er empty plains, 
And here and there some straggling foes he gleans. 
His flying coursers please him less and less, 
Asham'd of easy fight and cheap success. 
Thus half-contented, anxious in his mind, 
The distant cries come driving in the wind, 
Shouts from the walls, but shouts in murmurs drown'd; 
A jarring mixture, and a boding sound. 
"Alas!" said he, "what mean these dismal cries? 
What doleful clamors from the town arise?" 
Confus'd, he stops, and backward pulls the reins. 
She who the driver's office now sustains, 
Replies: "Neglect, my lord, these new alarms; 
Here fight, and urge the fortune of your arms: 
There want not others to defend the wall. 
If by your rival's hand th' Italians fall, 
So shall your fatal sword his friends oppress, 
In honor equal, equal in success." 
To this, the prince: "O sister- for I knew 
The peace infring'd proceeded first from you; 
I knew you, when you mingled first in fight; 
And now in vain you would deceive my sight- 
Why, goddess, this unprofitable care? 
Who sent you down from heav'n, involv'd in air, 
Your share of mortal sorrows to sustain, 
And see your brother bleeding on the plain? 
For to what pow'r can Turnus have recourse, 
Or how resist his fate's prevailing force? 
These eyes beheld Murranus bite the ground: 
Mighty the man, and mighty was the wound. 
I heard my dearest friend, with dying breath, 
My name invoking to revenge his death. 
Brave Ufens fell with honor on the place, 
To shun the shameful sight of my disgrace. 
On earth supine, a manly corpse he lies; 
His vest and armor are the victor's prize. 
Then, shall I see Laurentum in a flame, 
Which only wanted, to complete my shame? 
How will the Latins hoot their champion's flight! 
How Drances will insult and point them to the sight! 
Is death so hard to bear? Ye gods below, 
(Since those above so small compassion show,) 
Receive a soul unsullied yet with shame, 
Which not belies my great forefather's name!" 
He said; and while he spoke, with flying speed 
Came Sages urging on his foamy steed: 
Fix'd on his wounded face a shaft he bore, 
And, seeking Turnus, sent his voice before: 
"Turnus, on you, on you alone, depends 
Our last relief: compassionate your friends! 
Like lightning, fierce Aeneas, rolling on, 
With arms invests, with flames invades the town: 
The brands are toss'd on high; the winds conspire 
To drive along the deluge of the fire. 
All eyes are fix'd on you: your foes rejoice; 
Ev'n the king staggers, and suspends his choice; 
Doubts to deliver or defend the town, 
Whom to reject, or whom to call his son. 
The queen, on whom your utmost hopes were plac'd, 
Herself suborning death, has breath'd her last. 
'T is true, Messapus, fearless of his fate, 
With fierce Atinas' aid, defends the gate: 
On ev'ry side surrounded by the foe, 
The more they kill, the greater numbers grow; 
An iron harvest mounts, and still remains to mow. 
You, far aloof from your forsaken bands, 
Your rolling chariot drive o'er empty 
Stupid he sate, his eyes on earth declin'd, 
And various cares revolving in his mind: 
Rage, boiling from the bottom of his breast, 
And sorrow mix'd with shame, his soul oppress'd; 
And conscious worth lay lab'ring in his thought, 
And love by jealousy to madness wrought. 
By slow degrees his reason drove away 
The mists of passion, and resum'd her sway. 
Then, rising on his car, he turn'd his look, 
And saw the town involv'd in fire and smoke. 
A wooden tow'r with flames already blaz'd, 
Which his own hands on beams and rafters rais'd; 
And bridges laid above to join the space, 
And wheels below to roll from place to place. 
"Sister, the Fates have vanquish'd: let us go 
The way which Heav'n and my hard fortune show. 
The fight is fix'd; nor shall the branded name 
Of a base coward blot your brother's fame. 
Death is my choice; but suffer me to try 
My force, and vent my rage before I die." 
He said; and, leaping down without delay, 
Thro' crowds of scatter'd foes he freed his way. 
Striding he pass'd, impetuous as the wind, 
And left the grieving goddess far behind. 
As when a fragment, from a mountain torn 
By raging tempests, or by torrents borne, 
Or sapp'd by time, or loosen'd from the roots- 
Prone thro' the void the rocky ruin shoots, 
Rolling from crag to crag, from steep to steep; 
Down sink, at once, the shepherds and their sheep: 
Involv'd alike, they rush to nether ground; 
Stunn'd with the shock they fall, and stunn'd from earth rebound:

So Turnus, hasting headlong to the town, 
Should'ring and shoving, bore the squadrons down. 
Still pressing onward, to the walls he drew, 
Where shafts, and spears, and darts promiscuous flew, 
And sanguine streams the slipp'ry ground embrue. 
First stretching out his arm, in sign of peace, 
He cries aloud, to make the combat cease: 
"Rutulians, hold; and Latin troops, retire! 
The fight is mine; and me the gods require. 
'T is just that I should vindicate alone 
The broken truce, or for the breach atone. 
This day shall free from wars th' Ausonian state, 
Or finish my misfortunes in my fate." 
Both armies from their bloody work desist, 
And, bearing backward, form a spacious list. 
The Trojan hero, who receiv'd from fame 
The welcome sound, and heard the champion's name, 
Soon leaves the taken works and mounted walls, 
Greedy of war where greater glory calls. 
He springs to fight, exulting in his force 
His jointed armor rattles in the course. 
Like Eryx, or like Athos, great he shows, 
Or Father Apennine, when, white with snows, 
His head divine obscure in clouds he hides, 
And shakes the sounding forest on his sides. 
The nations, overaw'd, surcease the fight; 
Immovable their bodies, fix'd their sight. 
Ev'n death stands still; nor from above they throw 
Their darts, nor drive their batt'ring-rams below. 
In silent order either army stands, 
And drop their swords, unknowing, from their hands. 
Th' Ausonian king beholds, with wond'ring sight, 
Two mighty champions match'd in single fight, 
Born under climes remote, and brought by fate, 
With swords to try their titles to the state. 
Now, in clos'd field, each other from afar 
They view; and, rushing on, begin the war. 
They launch their spears; then hand to hand they meet; 
The trembling soil resounds beneath their feet: 
Their bucklers clash; thick blows descend from high, 
And flakes of fire from their hard helmets fly. 
Courage conspires with chance, and both ingage 
With equal fortune yet, and mutual rage. 
As when two bulls for their fair female fight 
In Sila's shades, or on Taburnus' height; 
With horns adverse they meet; the keeper flies; 
Mute stands the herd; the heifers roll their eyes, 
And wait th' event; which victor they shall bear, 
And who shall be the lord, to rule the lusty year: 
With rage of love the jealous rivals burn, 
And push for push, and wound for wound return; 
Their dewlaps gor'd, their sides are lav'd in blood; 
Loud cries and roaring sounds rebellow thro' the wood: 
Such was the combat in the listed ground; 
So clash their swords, and so their shields resound. 
Jove sets the beam; in either scale he lays 
The champions' fate, and each exactly weighs. 
On this side, life and lucky chance ascends; 
Loaded with death, that other scale descends. 
Rais'd on the stretch, young Turnus aims a blow 
Full on the helm of his unguarded foe: 
Shrill shouts and clamors ring on either side, 
As hopes and fears their panting hearts divide. 
But all in pieces flies the traitor sword, 
And, in the middle stroke, deserts his lord. 
Now is but death, or flight; disarm'd he flies, 
When in his hand an unknown hilt he spies. 
Fame says that Turnus, when his steeds he join'd, 
Hurrying to war, disorder'd in his mind, 
Snatch'd the first weapon which his haste could find. 
'T was not the fated sword his father bore, 
But that his charioteer Metiscus wore. 
This, while the Trojans fled, the toughness held; 
But, vain against the great Vulcanian shield, 
The mortal-temper'd steel deceiv'd his hand: 
The shiver'd fragments shone amid the sand. 
Surpris'd with fear, he fled along the field, 
And now forthright, and now in orbits wheel'd; 
For here the Trojan troops the list surround, 
And there the pass is clos'd with pools and marshy ground.

Aeneas hastens, tho' with heavier pace- 
His wound, so newly knit, retards the chase, 
And oft his trembling knees their aid refuse- 
Yet, pressing foot by foot, his foe pursues. 
Thus, when a fearful stag is clos'd around 
With crimson toils, or in a river found, 
High on the bank the deep-mouth'd hound appears, 
Still opening, following still, where'er he steers; 
The persecuted creature, to and fro, 
Turns here and there, to scape his Umbrian foe: 
Steep is th' ascent, and, if he gains the land, 
The purple death is pitch'd along the strand. 
His eager foe, determin'd to the chase, 
Stretch'd at his length, gains ground at ev'ry pace; 
Now to his beamy head he makes his way, 
And now he holds, or thinks he holds, his prey: 
Just at the pinch, the stag springs out with fear; 
He bites the wind, and fills his sounding jaws with air:

The rocks, the lakes, the meadows ring with cries; 
The mortal tumult mounts, and thunders in the skies. 
Thus flies the Daunian prince, and, flying, blames 
His tardy troops, and, calling by their names, 
Demands his trusty sword. The Trojan threats 
The realm with ruin, and their ancient seats 
To lay in ashes, if they dare supply 
With arms or aid his vanquish'd enemy: 
Thus menacing, he still pursues the course, 
With vigor, tho' diminish'd of his force. 
Ten times already round the listed place 
One chief had fled, and t' other giv'n the chase: 
No trivial prize is play'd; for on the life 
Or death of Turnus now depends the strife. 
Within the space, an olive tree had stood, 
A sacred shade, a venerable wood, 
For vows to Faunus paid, the Latins' guardian god. 
Here hung the vests, and tablets were ingrav'd, 
Of sinking mariners from shipwrack sav'd. 
With heedless hands the Trojans fell'd the tree, 
To make the ground inclos'd for combat free. 
Deep in the root, whether by fate, or chance, 
Or erring haste, the Trojan drove his lance; 
Then stoop'd, and tugg'd with force immense, to free 
Th' incumber'd spear from the tenacious tree; 
That, whom his fainting limbs pursued in vain, 
His flying weapon might from far attain. 
Confus'd with fear, bereft of human aid, 
Then Turnus to the gods, and first to Faunus pray'd: 
"O Faunus, pity! and thou Mother Earth, 
Where I thy foster son receiv'd my birth, 
Hold fast the steel! If my religious hand 
Your plant has honor'd, which your foes profan'd, 
Propitious hear my pious pray'r!" He said, 
Nor with successless vows invok'd their aid. 
Th' incumbent hero wrench'd, and pull'd, and strain'd; 
But still the stubborn earth the steel detain'd. 
Juturna took her time; and, while in vain 
He strove, assum'd Meticus' form again, 
And, in that imitated shape, restor'd 
To the despairing prince his Daunian sword. 
The Queen of Love, who, with disdain and grief, 
Saw the bold nymph afford this prompt relief, 
T' assert her offspring with a greater deed, 
From the tough root the ling'ring weapon freed. 
Once more erect, the rival chiefs advance: 
One trusts the sword, and one the pointed lance; 
And both resolv'd alike to try their fatal chance. 
Meantime imperial Jove to Juno spoke, 
Who from a shining cloud beheld the shock: 
"What new arrest, O Queen of Heav'n, is sent 
To stop the Fates now lab'ring in th' event? 
What farther hopes are left thee to pursue? 
Divine Aeneas, (and thou know'st it too,) 
Foredoom'd, to these celestial seats are due. 
What more attempts for Turnus can be made, 
That thus thou ling'rest in this lonely shade? 
Is it becoming of the due respect 
And awful honor of a god elect, 
A wound unworthy of our state to feel, 
Patient of human hands and earthly steel? 
Or seems it just, the sister should restore 
A second sword, when one was lost before, 
And arm a conquer'd wretch against his conqueror? 
For what, without thy knowledge and avow, 
Nay more, thy dictate, durst Juturna do? 
At last, in deference to my love, forbear 
To lodge within thy soul this anxious care; 
Reclin'd upon my breast, thy grief unload: 
Who should relieve the goddess, but the god? 
Now all things to their utmost issue tend, 
Push'd by the Fates to their appointed 
While leave was giv'n thee, and a lawful hour 
For vengeance, wrath, and unresisted pow'r, 
Toss'd on the seas, thou couldst thy foes distress, 
And, driv'n ashore, with hostile arms oppress; 
Deform the royal house; and, from the side 
Of the just bridegroom, tear the plighted bride: 
Now cease at my command." The Thund'rer said; 
And, with dejected eyes, this answer Juno made: 
"Because your dread decree too well I knew, 
From Turnus and from earth unwilling I withdrew. 
Else should you not behold me here, alone, 
Involv'd in empty clouds, my friends bemoan, 
But, girt with vengeful flames, in open sight 
Engag'd against my foes in mortal fight. 
'T is true, Juturna mingled in the strife 
By my command, to save her brother's life- 
At least to try; but, by the Stygian lake, 
(The most religious oath the gods can take,) 
With this restriction, not to bend the bow, 
Or toss the spear, or trembling dart to throw. 
And now, resign'd to your superior might, 
And tir'd with fruitless toils, I loathe the fight. 
This let me beg (and this no fates withstand) 
Both for myself and for your father's land, 
That, when the nuptial bed shall bind the peace, 
(Which I, since you ordain, consent to bless,) 
The laws of either nation be the same; 
But let the Latins still retain their name, 
Speak the same language which they spoke before, 
Wear the same habits which their grandsires wore. 
Call them not Trojans: perish the renown 
And name of Troy, with that detested town. 
Latium be Latium still; let Alba reign 
And Rome's immortal majesty remain." 
Then thus the founder of mankind replies 
(Unruffled was his front, serene his eyes) 
"Can Saturn's issue, and heav'n's other heir, 
Such endless anger in her bosom bear? 
Be mistress, and your full desires obtain; 
But quench the choler you foment in vain. 
From ancient blood th' Ausonian people sprung, 
Shall keep their name, their habit, and their tongue. 
The Trojans to their customs shall be tied: 
I will, myself, their common rites provide; 
The natives shall command, the foreigners subside. 
All shall be Latium; Troy without a name; 
And her lost sons forget from whence they came. 
From blood so mix'd, a pious race shall flow, 
Equal to gods, excelling all below. 
No nation more respect to you shall pay, 
Or greater off'rings on your altars lay." 
Juno consents, well pleas'd that her desires 
Had found success, and from the cloud retires. 
The peace thus made, the Thund'rer next prepares 
To force the wat'ry goddess from the wars. 
Deep in the dismal regions void of light, 
Three daughters at a birth were born to Night: 
These their brown mother, brooding on her care, 
Indued with windy wings to flit in air, 
With serpents girt alike, and crown'd with hissing hair.

In heav'n the Dirae call'd, and still at hand, 
Before the throne of angry Jove they stand, 
His ministers of wrath, and ready still 
The minds of mortal men with fears to fill, 
Whene'er the moody sire, to wreak his hate 
On realms or towns deserving of their fate, 
Hurls down diseases, death and deadly care, 
And terrifies the guilty world with war. 
One sister plague if these from heav'n he sent, 
To fright Juturna with a dire portent. 
The pest comes whirling down: by far more slow 
Springs the swift arrow from the Parthian bow, 
Or Cydon yew, when, traversing the skies, 
And drench'd in pois'nous juice, the sure destruction flies.

With such a sudden and unseen a flight 
Shot thro' the clouds the daughter of the night. 
Soon as the field inclos'd she had in view, 
And from afar her destin'd quarry knew, 
Contracted, to the boding bird she turns, 
Which haunts the ruin'd piles and hallow'd urns, 
And beats about the tombs with nightly wings, 
Where songs obscene on sepulchers she sings. 
Thus lessen'd in her form, with frightful cries 
The Fury round unhappy Turnus flies, 
Flaps on his shield, and flutters o'er his eyes. 
A lazy chillness crept along his blood; 
Chok'd was his voice; his hair with horror stood. 
Juturna from afar beheld her fly, 
And knew th' ill omen, by her screaming cry 
And stridor of her wings. Amaz'd with fear, 
Her beauteous breast she beat, and rent her flowing hair.

"Ah me!" she cries, "in this unequal strife 
What can thy sister more to save thy life? 
Weak as I am, can I, alas! contend 
In arms with that inexorable fiend? 
Now, now, I quit the field! forbear to fright 
My tender soul, ye baleful birds of night; 
The lashing of your wings I know too well, 
The sounding flight, and fun'ral screams of hell! 
These are the gifts you bring from haughty Jove, 
The worthy recompense of ravish'd love! 
Did he for this exempt my life from fate? 
O hard conditions of immortal state, 
Tho' born to death, not privileg'd to die, 
But forc'd to bear impos'd eternity! 
Take back your envious bribes, and let me go 
Companion to my brother's ghost below! 
The joys are vanish'd: nothing now remains, 
Of life immortal, but immortal pains. 
What earth will open her devouring womb, 
To rest a weary goddess in the tomb!" 
She drew a length of sighs; nor more she said, 
But in her azure mantle wrapp'd her head, 
Then plung'd into her stream, with deep despair, 
And her last sobs came bubbling up in air. 
Now stern Aeneas his weighty spear 
Against his foe, and thus upbraids his fear: 
"What farther subterfuge can Turnus find? 
What empty hopes are harbor'd in his mind? 
'T is not thy swiftness can secure thy flight; 
Not with their feet, but hands, the valiant fight. 
Vary thy shape in thousand forms, and dare 
What skill and courage can attempt in war; 
Wish for the wings of winds, to mount the sky; 
Or hid, within the hollow earth to lie!" 
The champion shook his head, and made this short reply: 
"No threats of thine my manly mind can move; 
'T is hostile heav'n I dread, and partial Jove." 
He said no more, but, with a sigh, repress'd 
The mighty sorrow in his swelling breast. 
Then, as he roll'd his troubled eyes around, 
An antique stone he saw, the common bound 
Of neighb'ring fields, and barrier of the ground; 
So vast, that twelve strong men of modern days 
Th' enormous weight from earth could hardly raise. 
He heav'd it at a lift, and, pois'd on high, 
Ran stagg'ring on against his enemy, 
But so disorder'd, that he scarcely knew 
His way, or what unwieldly weight he threw. 
His knocking knees are bent beneath the load, 
And shiv'ring cold congeals his vital blood. 
The stone drops from his arms, and, falling short 
For want of vigor, mocks his vain effort. 
And as, when heavy sleep has clos'd the sight, 
The sickly fancy labors in the night; 
We seem to run; and, destitute of force, 
Our sinking limbs forsake us in the course: 
In vain we heave for breath; in vain we cry; 
The nerves, unbrac'd, their usual strength deny; 
And on the tongue the falt'ring accents die: 
So Turnus far'd; whatever means he tried, 
All force of arms and points of art employ'd, 
The Fury flew athwart, and made th' endeavor void. 
A thousand various thoughts his soul confound; 
He star'd about, nor aid nor issue found; 
His own men stop the pass, and his own walls surround. 
Once more he pauses, and looks out again, 
And seeks the goddess charioteer in vain. 
Trembling he views the thund'ring chief advance, 
And brandishing aloft the deadly lance: 
Amaz'd he cow'rs beneath his conqu'ring foe, 
Forgets to ward, and waits the coming blow. 
Astonish'd while he stands, and fix'd with fear, 
Aim'd at his shield he sees th' impending spear. 
The hero measur'd first, with narrow view, 
The destin'd mark; and, rising as he threw, 
With its full swing the fatal weapon flew. 
Not with less rage the rattling thunder falls, 
Or stones from batt'ring-engines break the walls: 
Swift as a whirlwind, from an arm so strong, 
The lance drove on, and bore the death along. 
Naught could his sev'nfold shield the prince avail, 
Nor aught, beneath his arms, the coat of mail: 
It pierc'd thro' all, and with a grisly wound 
Transfix'd his thigh, and doubled him to ground. 
With groans the Latins rend the vaulted sky: 
Woods, hills, and valleys, to the voice reply. 
Now low on earth the lofty chief is laid, 
With eyes cast upward, and with arms display'd, 
And, recreant, thus to the proud victor pray'd: 
"I know my death deserv'd, nor hope to live: 
Use what the gods and thy good fortune give. 
Yet think, O think, if mercy may be shown- 
Thou hadst a father once, and hast a son- 
Pity my sire, now sinking to the grave; 
And for Anchises' sake old Daunus save! 
Or, if thy vow'd revenge pursue my death, 
Give to my friends my body void of breath! 
The Latian chiefs have seen me beg my life; 
Thine is the conquest, thine the royal wife: 
Against a yielded man, 't is mean ignoble strife." 
In deep suspense the Trojan seem'd to stand, 
And, just prepar'd to strike, repress'd his hand. 
He roll'd his eyes, and ev'ry moment felt 
His manly soul with more compassion melt; 
When, casting down a casual glance, he spied 
The golden belt that glitter'd on his side, 
The fatal spoils which haughty Turnus tore 
From dying Pallas, and in triumph wore. 
Then, rous'd anew to wrath, he loudly cries 
(Flames, while he spoke, came flashing from his eyes) 
"Traitor, dost thou, dost thou to grace pretend, 
Clad, as thou art, in trophies of my friend? 
To his sad soul a grateful off'ring go! 
'T is Pallas, Pallas gives this deadly blow." 
He rais'd his arm aloft, and, at the word, 
Deep in his bosom drove the shining sword. 
The streaming blood distain'd his arms around, 
And the disdainful soul came rushing thro' the wound. 

THE END

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright statement:
The Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
World Wide Web presentation is copyright (C) 1994-2000, Daniel
C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
All rights reserved under international and pan-American copyright
conventions, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part
in any form. Direct permission requests to classics@classics.mit.edu.
Translation of "The Deeds of the Divine Augustus" by Augustus is
copyright (C) Thomas Bushnell, BSG.

INFERNO I
Introduction to the Divine Comedy
The Wood and the Mountain
When half way through the journey of our life
I found that I was in a gloomy wood,
because the path which led aright was lost.
And ah, how hard it is to say just what
this wild and rough and stubborn woodland was,
the very thought of which renews my fear!
So bitter t is, that death is little worse;
but of the good to treat which there I found,
I ll speak of what I else discovered there.
I cannot well say how I entered it,
so full of slumber was I at the moment
when I forsook the pathway of the truth;
but after I had reached a mountains foot,
where that vale ended which had pierced my heart
with fear, I looked on high,
and saw its shoulders
mantled already with that planets rays
which leadeth one aright oer every path.
Then quieted a little was the fear,
which in the lake-depths of my heart had lasted
throughout the night I passed so piteously.
[[5]]
And even as he who, from the deep emerged
with sorely troubled breath upon the shore,
turns round, and gazes at the dangerous water;
even so my mind, which still was fleeing on,
turned back to look again upon the pass
which neer permitted any one to live.
When I had somewhat eased my weary body,
oer the lone slope I so resumed my way,
that eer the lower was my steady foot.
Then lo, not far from where the ascent began,
a Leopard which, exceeding light and swift,
was covered over with a spotted hide,
and from my presence did not move away;
nay, rather, she so hindered my advance,
that more than once I turned me to go back.
Some time had now from early morn elapsed,
and with those very stars the sun was rising
that in his escort were, when Love Divine
in the beginning moved those beauteous things;
I therefore had as cause for hoping well
of that wild beast with gaily mottled skin,
the hour of daytime and the years sweet season;
but not so, that I should not fear the sight,
which next appeared before me, of a Lion,
 against me this one seemed to be advancing
with head erect and with such raging hunger,
that even the air seemed terrified thereby 
[[7]]
and of a she-Wolf, which with every lust
seemed in her leanness laden, and had caused
many ere now to lead unhappy lives.
The latter so oppressed me with the fear
that issued from her aspect, that I lost
the hope I had of winning to the top.
And such as he is, who is glad to gain,
and who, when times arrive that make him lose,
weeps and is saddened in his every thought;
such did that peaceless animal make me,
which, gainst me coming, pushed me, step by step,
back to the place where silent is the sun.
While toward the lowland I was falling fast,
the sight of one was offered to mine eyes,
who seemed, through long continued silence, weak.
When him in that vast wilderness I saw,
Have pity on me, I cried out to him,
whateer thou be, or shade, or very man!
Not man, he answered, I was once a man;
and both my parents were of Lombardy,
and Mantuans with respect to fatherland.
Neath Julius was I born, though somewhat late,
and under good Augustus rule I lived
in Rome, in days of false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and of that just man,
Anchises son, I sang, who came from Troy
after proud Ilion had been consumed.
[[9]]
But thou, to such sore trouble why return?
Why climbst thou not the Mountain of Delight,
which is of every joy the source and cause?
Art thou that Virgil, then, that fountain-head
which poureth forth so broad a stream of speech?
I answered him with shame upon my brow.
O light and glory of the other poets,
let the long study, and the ardent love
which made me con thy book, avail me now.
Thou art my teacher and authority;
thou only art the one from whom I took
the lovely manner which hath done me honor.
Behold the beast on whose account I turned;
from her protect me, O thou famous Sage,
for she makes both my veins and pulses tremble!
A different course from this must thou pursue,
he answered, when he saw me shedding tears,
if from this wilderness thou wouldst escape;
for this wild beast, on whose account thou criest,
alloweth none to pass along her way,
but hinders him so greatly, that she kills;
and is by nature so malign and guilty,
that never doth she sate her greedy lust,
but after food is hungrier than before.
Many are the animals with which she mates,
and still more will there be, until the Hound
shall come, and bring her to a painful death.
[[11]]
He shall not feed on either land or wealth,
but wisdom, love and power shall be his food,
and tween two Feltros shall his birth take place.
Of that low Italy he ll be the savior,
for which the maid Camilla died of wounds,
with Turnus, Nisus and Euralus.
And he shall drive her out of every town,
till he have put her back again in Hell,
from which the earliest envy sent her forth.
I therefore think and judge it best for thee
to follow me; and I shall be thy guide,
and lead thee hence through an eternal place,
where thou shalt hear the shrieks of hopelessness
of those tormented spirits of old times,
each one of whom bewails the second death;
then those shalt thou behold who, though in fire,
contented are, because they hope to come,
wheneer it be, unto the blessd folk;
to whom, thereafter, if thou wouldst ascend,
there ll be for that a worthier soul than I.
With her at my departure I shall leave thee,
because the Emperor who rules up there,
since I was not obedient to His law,
wills none shall come into His town through me.
He rules as emperor everywhere, and there
as king; there is His town and lofty throne.
O happy he whom He thereto elects!
[[13]]
And I to him: O Poet, I beseech thee,
even by the God it was not thine to know,
so may I from this ill and worse escape,
conduct me thither where thou saidst just now,
that I may see Saint Peters Gate, and those
whom thou describest as so whelmed with woe.
He then moved on, and I behind him kept.
[[15]]
INFERNO II
Introduction to the Inferno
The Mission of Virgil

Daylight was going, and the dusky air
was now releasing from their weary toil
all living things on earth; and I alone
was making ready to sustain the war
both of the road and of the sympathy,
which my unerring memory will relate.
O Muses, O high Genius, help me now!
O Memory, that wrotest what I saw,
herewith shall thy nobility appear!
I then began: Consider, Poet, thou
that guidest me, if strong my virtue be,
or eer thou trust me to the arduous course.
Thou sayest that the sire of Silvio entered,
when still corruptible, the immortal world,
and that while in his body he was there.
Hence, that to him the Opponent of all ill
was courteous, considering the great result
that was to come from him, both who, and what,
seems not unfitting to a thoughtful man;
for he of fostering Rome and of her sway
in the Empyrean Heaven was chosen as sire;[[17]]
and both of these, if one would tell the truth,
were foreordained unto the holy place,
where greatest Peters follower hath his seat.
While on this quest, for which thou givst him praise,
he heard the things which of his victory
the causes were, and of the Papal Robe.
The Chosen Vessel went there afterward,
to bring thence confirmation in the faith,
through which one enters on salvations path.
But why should I go there, or who concedes it?
I m not Aeneas, nor yet Paul am I;
me worthy of this, nor I nor others deem.
If, therefore, I consent to come, I fear
lest foolish be my coming; thou art wise,
and canst much better judge than I can talk.
And such as he who unwills what he willed,
and changes so his purpose through new thoughts,
that what he had begun he wholly leaves;
such on that gloomy slope did I become;
for, as I thought it over, I gave up
the enterprise so hastily commenced.
If I have rightly understood thy words,
replied the shade of that Great-hearted man,
thy soul is hurt by shameful cowardice,
which many times so sorely hinders one,
that from an honored enterprise it turns him,
as seeing falsely doth a shying beast.[[19]]
In order that thou rid thee of this fear,
I ll tell thee why I came, and what I heard
the first time I was grieved on thy account.
Among the intermediate souls I was,
when me a Lady called, so beautiful
and happy, that I begged her to command.
Her eyes were shining brighter than a star,
when sweetly and softly she began to say,
as with an angels voice she spoke to me:
O courteous Mantuan spirit, thou whose fame
is still enduring in the world above,
and will endure as long as lasts the world,
a friend of mine, but not a friend of Fortune,
is on his journey oer the lonely slope
obstructed so, that he hath turned through fear;
and, from what I have heard of him in Heaven,
I fear lest he may now have strayed so far,
that I have risen too late to give him help.
Bestir thee, then, and with thy finished speech,
and with whatever his escape may need,
assist him so that I may be consoled.
I, who now have thee go, am Beatrice;
thence come I, whither I would fain return;
t was love that moved me, love that makes me speak.
When in the presence of my Lord again,
often shall I commend thee unto Him.
Thereat she ceased to speak, and I began:
[[21]]
O Lady of virtue, thou through whom alone
the human race excels all things contained
within the heaven that hath the smallest circles,
thy bidding pleases me so much, that late
I d be, hadst thou already been obeyed;
thou needst but to disclose to me thy will.
But tell me why thou dost not mind descending
into this center from that ample place,
whither thou art so eager to return.
Since thou wouldst know thereof so inwardly,
I ll tell thee briefly, she replied to me,
why I am not afraid to enter here.
Of those things only should one be afraid,
that have the power of doing injury;
not of the rest, for they should not be feared.
I, of His mercy, am so made by God,
that me your wretchedness doth not affect,
nor any flame of yonder fire molest.
There is a Gentle Lady up in Heaven,
who grieves so at this check, whereto I send thee,
that broken is stern judgment there above.
She called Luca in her prayer, and said:
Now hath thy faithful servant need of thee,
and I, too, recommend him to thy care.
Luca, hostile to all cruelty,
set forth thereat, and came unto the place,
where I with ancient Rachel had my seat.
[[23]]
Why, Beatrice, she said, true Praise of God,
dost thou not succour him who loved thee so,
that for thy sake he left the common herd?
Dost thou not hear the anguish of his cry?
seest not the death that fights him on the flood,
oer which the sea availeth not to boast?
Neer were there any in the world so swift
to seek their profit and avoid their loss,
as I, after such words as these were uttered,
descended hither from my blessd seat,
confiding in that noble speech of thine,
which honors thee and whosoeer has heard it.
Then, after she had spoken to me thus,
weeping she turned her shining eyes away;
which made me hasten all the more to come;
and, even as she wished, I came to thee,
and led thee from the presence of the beast,
which robbed thee of the fair Mounts short approach.
What is it, then? Why, why dost thou hold back?
Why dost thou lodge such baseness in thy heart,
and wherefore free and daring art thou not,
since three so blessd Ladies care for thee
within the court of Heaven, and my words, too,
give thee the promise of so much thats good?
As little flowers by the chill of night
bowed down and closed, when brightened by the sun,
stand all erect and open on their stems;
[[25]]
so likewise with my wearied strength did I;
and such good daring coursed into my heart,
that I began as one who had been freed:
O piteous she who hastened to my help,
and courteous thou, that didst at once obey
the words of truth that she addressed to thee!
Thou hast with such desire disposed my heart
toward going on, by reason of thy words,
that to my first intention I ve returned.
Go on now, since we two have but one will;
thou Leader, and thou Lord, and Teacher thou!
I thus addressed him; then, when he had moved,
I entered on the wild and arduous course.
[[27]]
INFERNO III
The Gate and Vestibule of Hell

Cowards and Neutrals. Acheron

Through me one goes into the town of woe,
through me one goes into eternal pain,
through me among the people that are lost.
Justice inspired my high exalted Maker;
I was created by the Might divine,
the highest Wisdom and the primal Love.
Before me there was naught created, save
eternal things, and I eternal last;
all hope abandon, ye that enter here!
These words of gloomy color I beheld
inscribed upon the summit of a gate;
whence I: Their meaning, Teacher, troubles me.
And he to me, like one aware, replied:
All fearfulness must here be left behind;
all forms of cowardice must here be dead.
We ve reached the place where, as I said to thee,
thou lt see the sad folk who have lost the Good
which is the object of the intellect.
Then, after he had placed his hand in mine
with cheerful face, whence I was comforted,
he led me in among the hidden things.
[[29]]
There sighs and wails and piercing cries of woe
reverberated through the starless air;
hence I, at first, shed tears of sympathy.
Strange languages, and frightful forms of speech,
words caused by pain, accents of anger, voices
both loud and faint, and smiting hands withal,
a mighty tumult made, which sweeps around
forever in that timelessly dark air,
as sand is wont, wheneer a whirlwind blows.
And I, whose head was girt about with horror,
said: Teacher, what is this I hear? What folk
is this, that seems so overwhelmed with woe?
And he to me: This wretched kind of life
the miserable spirits lead of those
who lived with neither infamy nor praise.
Commingled are they with that worthless choir
of Angels who did not rebel, nor yet
were true to God, but sided with themselves.
The heavens, in order not to be less fair,
expelled them; nor doth nether Hell receive them,
because the bad would get some glory thence.
And I: What is it, Teacher, grieves them so,
it causes them so loudly to lament?
I ll tell thee very briefly, he replied.
These have no hope of death, and so low down
is this unseeing life of theirs, that envious
they are of every other destiny.
[[31]]
The world allows no fame of them to live;
Mercy and Justice hold them in contempt.
Let us not talk of them; but look, and pass!
And I, who gazed intently, saw a flag,
which, whirling, moved so swiftly that to me
contemptuous it appeared of all repose;
and after it there came so long a line
of people, that I never would have thought
that death so great a number had undone.
When some I d recognized, I saw and knew
the shade of him who through his cowardice
the great Refusal made. I understood
immediately, and was assured that this
the band of cowards was, who both to God
displeasing are, and to His enemies.
These wretched souls, who never were alive,
were naked, and were sorely spurred to action
by means of wasps and hornets that were there.
The latter streaked their faces with their blood,
which, after it had mingled with their tears,
was at their feet sucked up by loathsome worms.
When I had given myself to peering further,
people I saw upon a great streams bank;
I therefore said: Now, Teacher, grant to me
that I may know who these are, and what law
makes them appear so eager to cross over,
as in this dim light I perceive they are.
[[33]]
And he to me: These things will be made clear
to thee, as soon as on the dismal strand
of Acheron we shall have stayed our steps.
Thereat, with shame-suffused and downcast eyes,
and fearing lest my talking might annoy him,
up to the river I abstained from speech.
Behold then, coming toward us in a boat,
an agd man, all white with ancient hair,
who shouted: Woe to you, ye souls depraved!
Give up all hope of ever seeing Heaven!
I come to take you to the other shore,
into eternal darkness, heat and cold.
And thou that yonder art, a living soul,
withdraw thee from those fellows that are dead.
But when he saw that I did not withdraw,
he said: By other roads and other ferries
shalt thou attain a shore to pass across,
not here; a lighter boat must carry thee.
To him my Leader: Charon, be not vexed;
thus is it yonder willed, where there is power
to do whateer is willed; so ask no more!
Thereat were quieted the woolly cheeks
of that old boatman of the murky swamp,
who round about his eyes had wheels of flame.
Those spirits, though, who nude and weary were,
their color changed, and gnashed their teeth together,
as soon as they had heard the cruel words.
[[35]]
They kept blaspheming God, and their own parents,
the human species, and the place, and time,
and seed of their conception and their birth.
Then each and all of them drew on together,
weeping aloud, to that accursd shore
which waits for every man that fears not God.
Charon, the demon, with his ember eyes
makes beckoning signs to them, collects them all,
and with his oar beats whoso takes his ease.
Even as in autumn leaves detach themselves,
now one and now another, till their branch
sees all its stripped off clothing on the ground;
so, one by one, the evil seed of Adam
cast themselves down that river-bank at signals,
as doth a bird to its recalling lure.
Thus oer the dusky waves they wend their way;
and ere they land upon the other side,
another crowd collects again on this.
My son, the courteous Teacher said to me,
all those that perish in the wrath of God
from every country come together here;
and eager are to pass across the stream,
because Justice Divine so spurs them on,
that what was fear is turned into desire.
A good soul never goes across from hence;
if Charon, therefore, findeth fault with thee,
well canst thou now know what his words imply.
[[37]]
The darkling plain, when this was ended, quaked
so greatly, that the memory of my terror
bathes me even now with sweat.
The tear-stained ground
gave forth a wind, whence flashed vermilion light
which in me overcame all consciousness;
and down I fell like one whom sleep oertakes.
[[39]]
INFERNO IV

The First Circle. The Borderland

Unbaptized Worthies. Illustrious Pagans

A heavy thunder-clap broke the deep sleep
within my head, so that I roused myself,
as would a person who is waked by force;
and standing up erect, my rested eyes
I moved around, and with a steady gaze
I looked about to know where I might be.
Truth is I found myself upon the verge
of pains abysmal valley, which collects
the thunder-roll of everlasting woes.
So dark it was, so deep and full of mist,
that, howsoeer I gazed into its depths,
nothing at all did I discern therein.
Into this blind world let us now descend!
the Poet, who was death-like pale, began,
I will be first, and thou shalt second be.
And I, who of his color was aware,
said: How am I to come, if thou take fright,
who rt wont to be my comfort when afraid?
The anguish of the people here below,
he said to me, brings out upon my face
the sympathy which thou dost take for fear.
[[41]]
Since our long journey drives us, let us go!
Thus he set forth, and thus he had me enter
the first of circles girding the abyss.
Therein, as far as one could judge by listning,
there was no lamentation, saving sighs
which caused a trembling in the eternal air;
and this came from the grief devoid of torture
felt by the throngs, which many were and great,
of infants and of women and of men.
To me then my good Teacher: Dost not ask
what spirits these are whom thou seest here?
Now I would have thee know, ere thou go further,
that these sinned not; and though they merits have,
t is not enough, for they did not have baptism,
the gateway of the creed believed by thee;
and if before Christianity they lived,
they did not with due worship honor God;
and one of such as these am I myself.
For such defects, and for no other guilt,
we re lost, and only hurt to this extent,
that, in desire, we live deprived of hope.
Great sorrow filled my heart on hearing this,
because I knew of people of great worth,
who in that Borderland suspended were.
Tell me, my Teacher, tell me, thou my Lord,
I then began, through wishing to be sure
about the faith which conquers every error;
[[43]]
came any ever, by his own deserts,
or by anothers, hence, who then was blest?
And he, who understood my covert speech,
replied: To this condition I was come
but newly, when I saw a Mighty One
come here, crowned with the sign of victory.
From hence He drew the earliest parents shade,
and that of his son, Abel, that of Noah,
and Moses the law-giver and obedient;
Abram the patriarch, and David king,
Israel, with both his father and his sons,
and Rachel, too, for whom he did so much,
and many others; and He made them blest;
and I would have thee know that, earlier
than these, there were no human spirits saved.
Because he talked we ceased not moving on,
but all the while were passing through the wood,
the wood, I mean, of thickly crowded shades.
Nor far this side of where I fell asleep
had we yet gone, when I beheld a fire,
which overcame a hemisphere of gloom.
Somewhat away from it we were as yet,
but not so far, but I could dimly see
that honorable people held that place.
O thou that honorest both art and science,
who are these people that such honor have,
that it divides them from the others life?
[[45]]
And he to me: The honorable fame,
which speaks of them in thy live world above,
in Heaven wins grace, which thus advances them.
And hereupon a voice was heard by me:
Do honor to the loftiest of poets!
his shade, which had departed, now returns.
And when the voice had ceased and was at rest,
four mighty shades I saw approaching us;
their looks were neither sorrowful nor glad.
My kindly Teacher then began to say:
Look at the one who comes with sword in hand
before the three, as if their lord he were.
Homer he is, the sovreign poet; Horace,
the satirist, the one that cometh next;
the third is Ovid, Lucan is the last.
Since each of them in common shares with me
the title which the voice of one proclaimed,
they do me honor, and therein do well.
Thus gathered I beheld the fair assembly
of those the masters of the loftiest song,
which soareth like an eagle oer the rest.
Then, having talked among themselves awhile,
they turned around to me with signs of greeting;
and, when he noticed this, my Teacher smiled.
And even greater honor still they did me,
for one of their own company they made me,
so that amid such wisdom I was sixth.
[[47]]
Thus on we went as far as to the light,
talking of things whereof is silence here
becoming, even as speech was, where we spoke.
We reached a noble Castles foot, seven times
encircled by high walls, and all around
defended by a lovely little stream.
This last we crossed as if dry land it were;
through seven gates with these sages I went in,
and to a meadow of fresh grass we came.
There people were with slow and serious eyes,
and, in their looks, of great authority;
they spoke but seldom and with gentle voice.
We therefore to one side of it drew back
into an open place so luminous
and high, that each and all could be perceived.
There on the green enamel opposite
were shown to me the spirits of the great,
for seeing whom I glory in myself.
I saw Electra with companions many,
of whom I knew both Hector and Aeneas,
and Caesar armed, with shining falcon eyes.
I saw Camilla with Penthesilea
upon the other side, and King Latinus,
who with Lavinia, his own daughter, sat.
I saw that Brutus who drove Tarquin out,
Lucretia, Julia, Martia and Cornelia,
and, all alone, I saw the Saladin.
[[49]]
Then, having raised my brows a little higher,
the Teacher I beheld of those that know,
seated amid a philosophic group.
They all look up to him, all honor him;
there Socrates and Plato I beheld,
who nearer than the rest are at his side;
Democritus, who thinks the world chance-born,
Diogenes, Anaxagoras and Thales,
Empedocles, Heraclitus, and Zeno;
of qualities I saw the good collector,
Dioscorides I mean; Orpheus I saw,
Tully and Livy, and moral Seneca;
Euclid, the geometer, and Ptolemy,
Hippocrates, Avicenna, Galen,
Averrhos, who made the famous comment.
I cannot speak of all of them in full,
because my long theme drives me on so fast,
that oft my words fall short of what I did.
The sixfold band now dwindles down to two;
my wise Guide leads me by a different path
out of the calm into the trembling air;
and to a place I come, where naught gives light.
[[51]]
INFERNO V

The Second Circle. Sexual Intemperance

The Lascivious and Adulterers

Thus from the first of circles I went down
into the second, which surrounds less space,
and all the greater pain, which goads to wailing.
There Minos stands in horrid guise, and snarls;
inside the entrance he examines sins,
judges, and, as he girds himself, commits.
I mean that when an ill-born soul appears
before him, it confesses itself wholly;
and thereupon that Connoisseur of sins
perceives what place in Hell belongs to it,
and girds him with his tail as many times,
as are the grades he wishes it sent down.
Before him there are always many standing;
they go to judgment, each one in his turn;
they speak and hear, and then are downward hurled.
O thou that comest to the inn of woe,
said Minos, giving up, on seeing me,
the execution of so great a charge,
see how thou enter, and in whom thou put
thy trust; let not the gate-ways width deceive thee!
To him my Leader: Why dost thou, too, cry?
[[53]]
Hinder thou not his fate-ordained advance;
thus is it yonder willed, where there is power
to do whateer is willed; so ask no more!
And now the woeful sounds of actual pain
begin to break upon mine ears; I now
am come to where much wailing smiteth me.
I reached a region silent of all light,
which bellows as the sea doth in a storm,
if lashed and beaten by opposing winds.
The infernal hurricane, which never stops,
carries the spirits onward with its sweep,
and, as it whirls and smites them, gives them pain.
Wheneer they come before the shattered rock,
there lamentations, moans and shrieks are heard;
there, cursing, they blaspheme the Power Divine.
I understood that to this kind of pain
are doomed those carnal sinners, who subject
their reason to their sensual appetite.
And as their wings bear starlings on their way,
when days are cold, in full and wide-spread flocks;
so doth that blast the evil spirits bear;
this way and that, and up and down it leads them;
nor only doth no hope of rest, but none
of lesser suffering, ever comfort them.
And even as cranes move on and sing their lays,
forming the while a long line in the air;
thus saw I coming, uttering cries of pain,
[[55]]
shades borne along upon the aforesaid storm;
I therefore said: Who, Teacher, are the people
the gloomy air so cruelly chastises?
The first of those of whom thou wouldst have news,
the latter thereupon said unto me,
was empress over lands of many tongues.
To sexual vice so wholly was she given,
that lust she rendered lawful in her laws,
thus to remove the blame she had incurred.
Semiramis she is, of whom one reads
that she gave suck to Ninus, and became
his wife; she held the land the Soldan rules.
The next is she who killed herself through love,
and to Sichaeus ashes broke her faith;
the lustful Cleopatra follows her.
See Helen, for whose sake so long a time
of guilt rolled by, and great Achilles see,
who fought with love when at the end of life.
Paris and Tristan see; and then he showed me,
and pointed out by name, a thousand shades
and more, whom love had from our life cut off.
When I had heard my Leader speak the names
of ladies and their knights of olden times,
pity oercame me, and I almost swooned.
Poet, I then began, I d gladly talk
with those two yonder who together go,
and seem to be so light upon the wind.
[[57]]
Thou lt see thy chance when nearer us they are;
said he, beseech them then by that same love
which leadeth them along, and they will come.
Soon as the wind toward us had bent their course.
I cried: O toil-worn souls, come speak with us,
so be it that One Else forbid it not!
As doves, when called by their desire, come flying
with raised and steady pinions through the air
to their sweet nest, borne on by their own will;
so from the band where Dido is they issued,
advancing through the noisome air toward us,
so strong with love the tone of my appeal.
O thou benign and gracious living creature,
that goest through the gloomy purple air
to visit us, who stained the world blood-red;
if friendly were the universal King,
for thy peace would we pray to Him, since pity
thou showest for this wretched woe of ours.
Of whatsoever it may please you hear
and speak, we will both hear and speak with you,
while yet, as now it is, the wind is hushed.
The town where I was born sits on the shore,
whither the Po descends to be at peace
together with the streams that follow him.
Love, which soon seizes on a well-born heart,
seized him for that fair bodys sake, whereof
I was deprived; and still the way offends me.
[[59]]
Love, which absolves from loving none that s loved,
seized me so strongly for his love of me,
that, as thou seest, it doth not leave me yet.
Love to a death in common led us on;
Cains ice awaiteth him who quenched our life.
These words were wafted down to us from them.
When I had heard those sorely troubled souls,
I bowed my head, and long I held it low,
until the Poet said: What thinkest thou?
When I made answer I began: Alas!
how many tender thoughts and what desire
induced these souls to take the woeful step!
I then turned back to them again and spoke,
and I began: Thine agonies, Francesca,
cause me to weep with grief and sympathy.
But tell me: at the time of tender sighs,
whereby and how did Love concede to you
that ye should know each others veiled desires?
And she to me: There is no greater pain
than to remember happy days in days
of misery; and this thy Leader knows.
But if to know the first root of our love
so yearning a desire possesses thee,
I ll do as one who weepeth while he speaks.
One day, for pastime merely, we were reading
of Launcelot, and how love oerpowered him;
alone we were, and free from all misgiving.
[[61]]
Oft did that reading cause our eyes to meet,
and often take the color from our faces;
and yet one passage only overcame us.
When we had read of how the longed-for smile
was kissed by such a lover, this one here,
who nevermore shall be divided from me,
trembling all over, kissed me on my mouth.
A Gallehault the book, and he who wrote it!
No further in it did we read that day.
While one was saying this, the other spirit
so sorely wept, that out of sympathy
I swooned away as though about to die,
and fell as falls a body that is dead.
[[63]]
INFERNO VI

The Third Circle. Intemperance in Food

Gluttons

On my return to consciousness, which closed
before the kindred couples piteous case,
which utterly confounded me with grief,
new torments all around me I behold,
and new tormented ones, whereer I move,
whereer I turn, and wheresoeer I gaze.
In the third circle am I, that of rain
eternal, cursd, cold and burdensome;
its measure and quality are never new.
Coarse hail, and snow, and dirty-colored water
through the dark air are ever pouring down;
and foully smells the ground receiving them.
A wild beast, Cerberus, uncouth and cruel,
is barking with three throats, as would a dog,
over the people that are there submerged.
Red eyes he hath, a dark and greasy beard,
a belly big, and talons on his hands;
he claws the spirits, flays and quarters them.
The rainfall causes them to howl like dogs;
with one side they make shelter for the other;
oft do the poor profaners turn about.
[[65]]
When Cerberus, the mighty worm, perceived us,
his mouths he opened, showing us his fangs;
nor had he any limb that he kept still.
My Leader then stretched out his opened palms,
and took some earth, and with his fists well filled,
he threw it down into the greedy throats.
And like a dog that, barking, yearns for food,
and, when he comes to bite it, is appeased,
since only to devour it doth he strain
and fight; even such became those filthy faces
of demon Cerberus, who, thundering, stuns
the spirits so, that they would fain be deaf.
Over the shades the heavy rain beats down
we then were passing, as our feet we set
upon their unreal bodies which seem real.
They each and all were lying on the ground,
excepting one, which rose and sat upright,
when it perceived us pass in front of it.
O thou that through this Hell art being led,
it said to me, recall me, if thou canst;
for thou, before I unmade was, wast made.
And I to it: The anguish thou art in
perchance withdraws thee from my memory so,
it doth not seem that thee I ever saw.
But tell me who thou art, that in so painful
a place art set, and to such punishment,
that none, though greater, so repulsive is.
[[67]]
And he to me: Thy town, which is so full
of envy that the bag oerflows already,
owned me when I was in the peaceful life.
Ciacco, you townsmen used to call me then;
for my injurious fault of gluttony
I m broken, as thou seest, by the rain;
nor yet am I, sad soul, the only one,
for all these here are subject, for like fault,
unto like pain. Thereat he spoke no more.
Thy trouble, Ciacco, I replied to him,
so burdens me that it invites my tears;
but tell me, if thou canst, to what will come
the citizens of our divided town;
if any one therein is just; and tell me
the reason why such discord hath assailed her.
And he to me then: After struggling long
they ll come to bloodshed, and the boorish party
will drive the other out with much offence.
Then, afterward, the latter needs must fall
within three suns, and the other party rise,
by help of one who now is on the fence.
A long time will it hold its forehead up,
keeping the other under grievous weights,
howeer it weep therefor, and be ashamed.
Two men are just, but are not heeded there;
the three sparks that have set mens hearts on fire,
are overweening pride, envy and greed.
[[69]]
Herewith he closed his tear-inspiring speech.
And I to him: I d have thee teach me still,
and grant the favor of some further talk.
Farinta and Tegghiio, who so worthy were,
Jcopo Rusticcci, Arrigo and Mosca,
and the others who were set on doing good,
tell me where these are, and let me know of them;
for great desire constraineth me to learn
if Heaven now sweeten, or Hell poison them.
And he: Among the blackest souls are these;
a different fault weighs toward the bottom each;
if thou descend so far, thou mayst behold them.
But when in the sweet world thou art again,
recall me, prithee, unto others minds;
I tell no more, nor further answer thee.
His fixed eyes thereupon he turned askance;
a while he looked at me, then bowed his head,
and fell therewith among the other blind.
Then said my Leader: He ll not wake again
on this side of the angel-trumpets sound.
What time the hostile Podest shall come,
each soul will find again its dismal tomb,
each will take on again its flesh and shape,
and hear what through eternity resounds.
We thus passed through with slowly moving steps
the filthy mixture of the shades and rain,
talking a little of the future life;
[[71]]
because of which I said: These torments, Teacher,
after the Final Sentence will they grow,
or less become, or burn the same as now.
And he to me: Return thou to thy science,
which holdeth that the more a thing is perfect,
so much the more it feels of weal or woe.
Although this cursd folk shall nevermore
arrive at true perfection, it expects
to be more perfect after, than before.
As in a circle, round that road we went,
speaking at greater length than I repeat,
and came unto a place where one descends;
there found we Plutus, the great enemy.
[[73]]
INFERNO VII

The Fourth Circle. Intemperance in Wealth

Misers and Prodigals. The Fifth Circle

Pap Satn, pap Satn, alpp!
thus Plutus with his clucking voice began;
that noble Sage, then, who knew everything,
said, to encourage me: Let not thy fear
distress thee, for, whatever power he have,
he ll not prevent our going down this rock.
Then to those swollen lips he turned around,
and said: Be silent, thou accursd wolf;
with thine own rage consume thyself within!
Not causeless is our going to the bottom;
there is it willed on high, where Michael wrought
vengeance upon the arrogant rebellion.
As sails, when swollen by the wind, fall down
entangled, when the mast breaks; even so,
down to the ground the cruel monster fell.
Into the fourth ditch we descended thus,
advancing further oer the woeful edge,
which bags all evil in the universe.
Justice of God, alas! who heapeth up
the many unheard of toils and pains I saw,
and wherefore doth our sin torment us so?
[[75]]
As yonder oer Charybdis doth the sea,
which breaks against the one it runs to meet,
so must the people dance a ring-dance here.
I here saw folk, more numerous than elsewhere,
on one side and the other, with great howls
rolling big weights around by strength of chest;
they struck against each other; then, right there
each turned, and rolling back his weight, cried out:
Why keepest thou? and Wherefore throw away?
They circled thus around the gloomy ring
on either hand unto the point opposed,
still shouting each to each their vile refrain;
then each turned back, when through his own half-ring
he had attained the other butting place.
And I, whose heart was well nigh broken, said:
Now, Teacher, show me who these people are,
and tell me whether all these tonsured ones
upon our left ecclesiastics were.
And he replied to me: They each and all
were in their first life so squint-eyed in mind,
that they with measure used no money there.
Clearly enough their voices bark it forth,
wheneer they reach the two points of the ring,
where difference in fault unmateth them.
These churchmen were, who have no hairy covering
upon their heads, and Popes and Cardinals,
among whom avarice works its mastery.
[[77]]
And I to him: Among such men as these
I surely, Teacher, ought to recognize
a few, who by these sins polluted were.
And he to me: Thou shapest a vain thought;
the undiscerning life which made them foul,
now to all recognition makes them dark.
To these two shocks they ll come eternally;
these from the sepulchre will rise again
close-fisted; these, shorn of their very hair.
Ill-giving and ill-keeping took from them
the lovely world, and set them at this fray;
to qualify it I ll not use fair words.
Now canst thou, son, behold the short-lived cheat
of riches that are put in Fortunes care,
and for whose sake the human race contends;
for, all the gold there is beneath the moon,
and all that was there once, could not avail
to make one of these weary spirits rest.
Teacher, said I to him, now tell me further:
what is this Fortune thou dost touch upon,
which hath the worlds good things thus in her claws?
O foolish creatures, said he then to me.
how great the ignorance which hurteth you!
I d have thee swallow now my thought of her.
The One whose knowledge everything transcends,
so made the heavens, and so gave guides to them,
that every part on every other shines,
[[79]]
thus equally distributing the light;
likewise for worldly splendours He ordained
a general minister and guide, to change,
from time to time, the vain goods of the world
from race to race, from one blood to another,
past all resistance by the minds of men;
wherefore, one people governs, and the other
declines in power, according to her judgment,
which hidden is, as in the grass a snake.
Your knowledge is not able to resist her;
foreseeing, she decides, and carries on
her government, as theirs the other gods.
Her permutations have no truce at all;
necessity compels her to be swift;
hence oft it happens that a change occurs.
This is the one who is so often cursed
even by those who ought to give her praise,
yet give her blame amiss, and ill repute.
But she is blest, and gives no heed to that;
among the other primal creatures glad,
she turns her sphere, and blest enjoys herself.
But now to woe more piteous let s descend;
now falls each star that rose when I set out,
and one is here forbidden too long a stay.
We crossed the circle to the other bank
over a bubbling stream, that poureth down
along a ditch which from it takes its shape.
[[81]]
Than purple-black much darker was its water;
and we, accompanying its dusky waves,
went down and entered on an uncouth path.
A swamp it forms which hath the name of Styx,
this dismal little brook, when it hath reached
the bottom of the grey, malignant slopes.
And I, who was intensely gazing there,
saw muddy people in that slimy marsh,
all naked, and with anger in their looks.
They struck each other, not with hands alone,
but with their heads and chests, and with their feet,
and rent each other piecemeal with their teeth.
Said the good Teacher: Son, thou seest now
the souls of those whom anger overcame;
nay, more, I d have thee certainly believe
that neath the water there are folk who sigh,
and make this water bubble at its surface,
as, wheresoeer it turn, thine eye reveals.
Stuck in the slime, they say: Sullen we were
in the sweet air that s gladdened by the sun,
bearing within us fumes of surliness;
we now are sullen in the swamps black mire.
This hymn they gurgle down inside their throats,
because they cannot utter it with perfect speech.
And so we circled round the filthy fen
a great arc tween the dry bank and the marsh,
our eyes intent on those that swallow mud;
and to a towers foot we came at last.
[[83]]
INFERNO VIII

The Fifth Circle. Intemperance in Indignation

The Wrathful and Sullen. Styx. The City of Dis

I say, continuing, that long before
we ever reached the lofty towers foot,
our eyes had upward toward its summit turned,
because of two small flames we there saw placed,
and of another answering from so far,
that hardly could mine eyesight make it out.
Then to all wisdoms Sea I turned around,
and said: What sayeth this? and what replies
that other fire? and who are they that made it?
And he to me: Upon the filthy waves
thou canst already see what is expected,
unless the marshs fog conceal it from thee.
Bowstring neer shot an arrow from itself,
that sped away so swiftly through the air,
as I beheld a slender little boat
come toward us through the water thereupon,
under the guidance of a single boatman,
who shouted: Thou art caught now, wicked soul!
O Phlegyas, Phlegyas, said my Master then,
this time thou criest out in vain! No longer
shalt thou have us, than while we cross the swamp.
[[85]]
Like one who listens to a great deceit
practiced upon him, and who then resents it,
so Phlegyas in his stifled wrath became.
My Leader then went down into the boat,
and had me enter after him; and only
when I was in it did it laden seem.
Soon as my Leader and I were in the boat,
the ancient prow goes on its way, and cuts
more water than with others is its wont.
While we were speeding through the stagnant trench,
one stood before me filled with mud, and said:
Now who art thou, that comest ere thy time?
And I to him: Even though I come, I stay not;
but who art thou, that art become so foul?
He answered: As thou seest, I m one who weeps.
Then I to him: In sorrow and in grief
mayst thou, accursd spirit, here remain,
for thee I know, all filthy though thou be!
Then toward the boat he stretched out both his hands;
my wary Teacher, therefore, thrust him off,
saying: Away there with the other dogs!
And with his arms he then embraced my neck,
and kissed my face, and said: Blessd be she
who pregnant was with thee, indignant soul!
He was a haughty person in the world;
nor is there any goodness which adorns
his memory; hence his shade is furious here.
[[87]]
How many now up yonder think themselves
great kings, who here shall be like pigs in mire,
leaving behind them horrible contempt!
And I said: Teacher, I d be greatly pleased
to see him get a ducking in this broth,
before we issue from the marshy lake.
And he to me: Thou shalt be satisfied
before the shore reveal itself to thee;
t is meet that thou enjoy a wish like that.
Soon after this I saw the muddy people
making such havoc of him, that therefor
I still give praise and render thanks to God.
They all were shouting: At Filippo Argenti!
the spirit of the wrathful Florentine
turning, meanwhile, his teeth against himself.
We left him there; of him I therefore tell
no more; but on mine ears there smote a wail,
hence I, intent ahead, unbar mine eyes.
The kindly Teacher said: Now, son, at last
the town, whose name is Dis, is drawing near
with all its host of burdened citizens.
And I said: Teacher, clearly I behold
its mosques already in that valley there,
vermilion, as if issuing out of fire.
And he to me: The eternal fire within
which keeps them burning, maketh them look red,
as thou perceivest in this nether Hell.
[[89]]
Thereat we came inside the trenches deep,
which fortify that region comfortless;
to me its walls appeared to be of iron.
Not without going first a long way round,
we came to where the boatman cried aloud
to us: Get out, for here the entrance is!
More than a thousand oer the gates I saw
of those that from the heavens had rained, who, vexed,
were saying: Who is he, that, without death,
is going through the kingdom of the dead?
And my wise Teacher thereupon made signs
of wishing to have private talk with them.
Their great disdain they somewhat checked, and said:
Come thou alone, and let him go his way,
who with such daring entered this domain.
Let him retrace alone his foolish road,
and try it, if he can; for thou shalt here
remain, that him so dark a land didst show.
Think, Reader, whether I lost heart on hearing
those cursd words; for I did not believe
that I should eer return on earth again.
O my dear Leader, who hast made me safe
more than seven times, and extricated me
from serious dangers which I had to face,
forsake me not, said I, when so undone!
If further progress be denied to us,
let us at once retrace our steps together.
[[91]]
That Lord then, who had brought me thither, said:
Be not afraid; for none can take from us
our passage, since by such an One t is given!
But thou, await me here, and with good hope
nourish and comfort thou thy weary soul,
for I ll not leave thee in the nether world.
Thus goes his way, and there abandons me,
my tender Father, and I in doubt remain;
for Yes and No contend within my head.
I could not hear what he proposed to them;
but with them there he did not long remain,
for each in rivalry ran back within.
They closed the gates, those enemies of ours,
right in my Masters face, who stayed outside,
and walking with slow steps returned to me.
His eyes were downcast, and his eyebrows shorn
of all self-trust, and as he sighed he said:
Who has forbidden me the homes of pain?
Though I get angry, be not thou dismayed,
he said to me, for I shall win the fight,
whateer defensive stir be made within.
This insolence of theirs is nothing new,
for at a gateway less concealed than this
they used it once, which still is lockless found.
Deaths scroll thou sawest over it; and now
this side of it One such descends the slope,
crossing the rings unguided, that through him
the city will be opened unto us.
[[93]]
INFERNO IX

The Gate of the City of Dis

The Sixth Circle. Heresy

The color cowardice brought out on me,
who saw my Leader coming back, the sooner
repressed in him his unaccustomed hue.
He stopped attentive like a man who listens;
because his eyesight could not lead him far
through the dark air, and through the heavy fog.
Yet we must win the battle, he began,
unless . . . One such did offer us herself!
Oh, how I long for some one to arrive!
I well perceived how, when he overlaid
what he began to say by what came after,
that these were words that differed from the first.
But none the less his language gave me fear,
because I lent to his unfinished phrase
a meaning worse, perhaps, than he intended.
Into this bottom of the dismal shell
doth any of that first grade eer descend,
whose only penalty is hope cut off?
I asked this question. He replied to me:
It seldom comes to pass that one of us
performs the journey whereupon I go.
[[95]]
T is true that I was conjured once before
down here by magic of that wild Erchtho,
who used to call shades back into their bodies.
My flesh had hardly been made bare of me,
when me she forced to enter yonder wall,
and thence withdraw a soul from Judas ring.
That is the lowest and the darkest place,
and from the heaven that turns all things most distant;
well do I know the road; so be at rest!
This marsh, from which the mighty stench exhales,
girdles the woeful city round about,
which without wrath we cannot enter now.
And more he said, but I recall it not,
because mine eye had made me wholly heed
the glowing summit of the lofty tower,
where three infernal Furies stained with blood
had suddenly uprisen all at once,
having the members and the mien of women,
and girt with water-snakes of brightest green;
for hair they had small serpents and horned snakes,
wherewith their frightful temples were entwined.
And he, who well the handmaids of the Queen
of everlasting lamentation knew,
said unto me: Behold the fierce Ernyes!
This is Megaera here upon the left;
Alecto, she who weepeth on the right;
Tisphons between. Thereat he ceased.
[[97]]
Each with her nails was tearing at her breast;
they smote them with their hands, and cried so loud,
that to the Poet I drew close in dread.
Now let Medusa come! We ll turn him thus
to stone! they all cried out, as down they looked;
wrong were we not to punish Theseus raid.
Turn back, and close thine eyes, for should the Gorgon
reveal itself, and thou behold the face,
there d be no more returning up above.
The Teacher thus: and turning me himself,
on my hands he did not so far rely,
as not to close mine eyes with his as well.
O ye in whom intelligence is sound,
heed carefully the teaching which lies hidden
beneath the veil of my mysterious lines!
There now was coming oer the turbid waves
the uproar of a dread-inspiring sound,
because of which both shores were all aquake,
a noise like nothing other than a wind,
impetuous through opposing heats, which smites
a forest, and without the least restraint
shatters, lays low, and carries off its boughs;
dust-laden it goes proudly on its way,
and makes wild animals and shepherds flee.
He freed mine eyes, and said: Direct thou now
thy keenest vision oer that ancient scum,
to where that reeking smoke is most intense.
[[99]]
As frogs before the hostile water-snake
scatter in all directions through the water,
till each is squatting huddled on the shore;
more than a thousand ruined souls I saw,
who thus from one were fleeing, who on foot,
but with dry feet, was passing over Styx.
That dense air he kept moving from his face
by often passing his left hand before him,
and only with that trouble weary seemed.
I well perceived he was a Messenger
from Heaven, and to my Teacher turned; with signs
he warned me to keep still, and bow before him.
Ah, how disdainful did he seem to me!
He reached the gate, and with a little wand
he opened it, for hindrance had he none.
O people thrust from Heaven and held in scorn,
upon the horrid threshold he began,
whence dwells in you this overweening pride?
Why is it that ye kick against the Will,
from which its end can never be cut off,
and which hath more than once increased your pain?
Of what avail to butt against the Fates?
Your Cerberus, if ye remember well,
still sports for this a hairless chin and neck.
He then returned along the filthy road,
nor did he say a word to us; but looked
like one whom other cares constrain and gnaw,
[[101]]
than that of him who in his presence is;
then we with full assurance toward the town,
after those holy words, addressed our steps.
We entered it without the least contention;
and I, who longed to look about and see
the state of those whom such a fortress holds,
when I was in it, cast mine eyes around,
and see on every side an ample plain,
with anguish and with awful torture filled.
Even as at Arles, where marshy turns the Rhone,
or as at Pola near Quarnaros gulf,
which bounds Italia, and her border bathes,
the sepulchres make all the ground uneven;
so likewise did they here on every side,
save that their nature was more bitter here;
for flames were spread about within the tombs,
whereby they glowed with such intensity,
that no art needeth greater heat for iron.
The lids of all of them were raised, and wails
so woeful issued thence, that of a truth
they seemed the wails of wretched, tortured men.
Teacher, what sort of people are those there,
said I, who, buried in those arc-like tombs,
make themselves heard by means of woeful sighs?
Arch-heretics are with their followers here
said he, of every sect, and far more laden
than thou believest are the sepulchers.
[[103]]
Here like with like is buried, and more hot
and less so are the monuments. Thereat,
when he had turned him to the right, we passed
between the woes and lofty bastioned walls.
[[105]]
INFERNO X

The Sixth Circle. Heresy

Heretics

Now wends his way along a narrow path,
between the torments and the citys wall,
my Teacher and, behind his shoulders, I.
O lofty Virtue, I began, that leadst me
around the impious circles at thy pleasure,
converse with me and satisfy my wishes.
The people that are lying in the tombs,
could they be seen? For all the lids are raised,
it seems, and there is no one keeping guard.
And he to me: They all will be locked in,
when from Jehoshaphat they here return
together with the bodies they have left
above. On this side have their burial-place
with Epicurus all his followers,
who claim that with the body dies the soul.
To the request, however, which thou makest
thou lt soon receive a due reply in here,
as also to the wish thou keepest from me.
And I: Good Leader, I but keep my heart
concealed from thee, in order to speak little;
nor hast thou only now thereto disposed me.
[[107]]
O Tuscan, thou that through the town of fire
dost go alive with such respectful speech,
in this place be thou pleased to stay thy steps.
Thy very language makes thee manifest
a native of that noble fatherland,
to which I was, perhaps, too great a bane.
All of a sudden issued forth these words
from one of those ark-tombs; hence I, in fear,
a little closer to my Leader drew.
And he said: Turn around; what doest thou?
See Farinata who has risen there;
thou lt see him wholly from his girdle up.
Already had I fixed mine eyes on his;
and he was standing up with chest and head
erect, as if he had great scorn for Hell.
My Leader then with bold and ready hands
pushed me between the sepulchers toward him,
saying: Now let thy words be frank and clear.
When I was neath his tomb, he looked at me
awhile, and then, as though disdainfully,
he asked of me: Who were thine ancestors?
And I, who was desirous to obey,
hid it not from him, but revealed it all;
whereat he slightly raised his brows, and said:
So bitterly were they opposed to me,
and to mine ancestors, and to my party,
that I on two occasions scattered them.
[[109]]
If they were driven out, I answered him,
from all directions they returned both times;
your people, though, have not well learned that art.
A shade then at the tombs uncovered mouth
rose at his side as far up as his chin;
I think that he had risen upon his knees.
Round me he looked, as if he wished to see
whether some other one were with me there;
but when his doubt had wholly spent itself,
weeping he said: If thou through this blind prison
dost go by reason of highmindedness,
where is my son? and why is he not with thee?
And I to him: I come not by myself;
he who is waiting yonder leads me here,
one whom, perhaps, your Guido held in scorn.
The nature of his torment and his words
had read this persons name to me already;
on this account was my reply so full.
Then of a sudden standing up, he cried:
What saidst thou? Held? Is he not still alive?
Doth not the sweet light strike upon his eyes?
When he perceived the short delay I made
before replying, down upon his back
he fell, nor outside showed himself again.
The other one, meanwhile, the great-souled man,
at whose request I stopped, changed not his looks,
nor did he move his neck or turn his side.
[[111]]
And If, continuing his previous words,
he said: if they have badly learned that art,
far more doth that torment me than this bed.
And yet that Ladys face who ruleth here
shall not be lighted fifty times again,
ere thou shalt know how heavy that art is.
And so mayst thou return to the sweet world,
pray tell me why so pitiless toward mine
that people is in every law of theirs?
Whence I to him: The havoc and great slaughter
which caused the Arbia to be colored red,
occasion such petitions in our church.
When, sighing, he had tossed his head, he said:
In this thing I was not alone, nor surely
had I, without due cause, moved with the rest;
but I was yonder, where assent was given
by every one to do away with Florence,
the only one to openly defend her.
So may your seed eventually repose,
I begged of him, untie for me, I pray,
the knot which has perplexed my thinking here.
It seems, if well I hear, that ye behold
beforehand that which time brings with itself,
while in the present ye do otherwise.
We see, he said, like one whose sight is poor,
things that are far from us; to that extent
the Highest Leader shines upon us still.
[[113]]
When they approach, or are, our intellect
is wholly vain, and we, if others bring
no news, know nothing of your human state.
Hence thou canst understand that wholly dead
will be our knowledge from that moment on,
when closed shall be the gateway of the future.
Thereat, for I was grieved at my mistake,
I said: You ll therefore tell that fallen man
his son is dwelling with the living still;
and if in answering I was mute just now,
cause him to know it was because my thoughts
were struggling with the problem you have solved.
And now my Teacher was recalling me;
with greater haste I therefore begged the spirit
that he would tell me who was with him there.
He said: With oer a thousand here I lie;
the second Frederick and the Cardinal
are here within; I speak not of the rest.
He thereupon concealed himself; and I,
those words recalling which seemed hostile to me,
back toward the ancient Poet turned my steps.
The latter moved; and then, as on we went,
he said to me: Why art thou so perplexed?
And him in what he asked I satisfied.
Then let thy mind preserve, that Sage enjoined,
what thou hast heard against thyself; pay now
attention here! His finger then he raised.
[[115]]
When in the sweet rays presence thou shalt be
of Her whose lovely eyes see everything,
from her thou lt know the journey of thy life.
Thereafter to the left he turned his feet;
we left the wall, and toward the middle went
along a path which to a valley leads,
which even up there unpleasant made its stench.
[[117]]
INFERNO XI

The Sixth Circle. Heresy

The Distribution of the Damned in the Inferno

Upon the utmost verge of a high bank,
formed in a circle by great broken rocks,
we came upon a still more cruel pack;
and there, by reason of the horrible
excess of stench the deep abyss exhales,
for shelter we withdrew behind the lid
of a large tomb, whereon I saw a scroll
which said: Pope Anastasius I contain,
whom out of the right way Photinus drew.
Our going down from here must be delayed,
so that our sense may first get used a little
to this foul blast; we shall not mind it then.
The Teacher thus; and I: Find thou therefor
some compensation, lest our time be lost.
And he to me: See how I think of this.
My son, within these rocks, he then began,
are three small circles which, from grade to grade,
are similar to those thou leavest now.
Full of accursd spirits are they all;
but that hereafter sight alone suffice thee,
hear how, and wherefore they are packed together.
[[119]]
Of all wrong-doing which in Heaven wins hate
injustice is the end, and each such end
aggrieves by either violence or fraud.
But whereas fraud is mans peculiar evil,
God hates it most; therefore the fraudulent
are down below, and greater pain assails them.
All the first circle holds the violent;
but since against three persons force is used,
its shape divides it into three great rings.
Both against God, ones neighbor, and one s self
may force be used; against themselves, I mean,
and what is theirs, as clearly shown thou lt hear.
By force both death and painful wounds are given
one s neighbor, and thereby his property
is ruined, burned, and by extortions robbed;
the first ring, hence, torments in separate troops
all homicides and those that smite with malice,
spoilers of property and highway robbers.
Upon oneself may one lay violent hands,
and on one s goods; hence in the second ring
must needs repentant be without avail
whoever of your world deprives himself,
gambles away and dissipates his means,
and weepeth there where he should joyful be.
Gainst God may force be used, by wittingly
denying that He is, by blasphemy,
and by disprizing Nature and His Goodness;
[[121]]
and therefore with its mark the lesser ring
sealeth both Sodom and Cahors, and him
who, speaking from his heart, despises God.
And fraud, whereby all consciences are bitten,
one may employ against a man who trusts him,
and gainst a man who storeth up no trust.
This latter kind of fraud would seem to kill
only the bond of love which Nature makes;
hence in the second circle make their nest
hypocrisy, and flatteries, and workers
of magic, coining, theft and simony,
panders and grafters, and such filth as these.
In the other way forgotten is the love
which Nature makes, and that which afterward
is joined thereto, whence special trust is born;
hence in the smallest ring, where the universe
its center hath, and on which Dis is seated,
whoeer betrays is spent eternally.
Teacher, said I, thine argument proceeds
most lucidly, and full well classifies
this deep abyss and those that people it.
But tell me now: those of the muddy marsh,
those whom the wind drives, those the rain beats down,
and those that with such keen tongues meet each other,
why are nt they punished in the red-hot town,
if God be angry with them? and, if not,
why are they tortured in those several ways?
[[123]]
And he to me: Why doth thine intellect
wander so far from that which is its wont,
or doth thy mind intently gaze elsewhere?
Hast thou no recollection of the words
with which thine Ethics treats extensively
the dispositions three which Heaven rejects,
Incontinence, and Malice, and insane
Bestiality, and how Incontinence
offends God least, and hence receives least blame?
If thou consider this opinion well,
and then remember who those are above,
that outside undergo their punishment,
well shalt thou see why from these wretches here
they re set apart, and why less wrathfully
Vengeance Divine is hammering on them there.
O Sun that healest every troubled sight,
thou so contentest me when answering questions,
that doubt, no less than knowledge, pleases me.
Return a little further back, said I,
to where thou sayest usury offends
Goodness Divine, and loose the tangled knot.
Philosophy said he to me, points out
to him that understandeth it, and not
in one part only, that Nature takes her course
from the Intellect Divine, and from its Art;
and if thou note thy Physics carefully,
after not many pages shalt thou find
[[125]]
that your art follows that, as best it can,
as the disciple him who teaches; hence,
your art is grandchild, as it were, to God.
From these two things, if thou recall to mind
the first of Genesis, must people needs
obtain their livelihood, and progress make.
And as the usurer takes another course,
Nature both in herself and in her follower
he scorneth, since in something else he trusts.
But follow me now, for I please to go;
because the Fishes oer the horizon quiver,
and wholly over Caurus lies the Wain,
and one descends the bank much further on.
[[127]]
INFERNO XII

The Seventh Circle. The First Ring. Violence against ones Fellow Man. Murderers and Spoilers. Phlegethon

The place, where to descend the bank we came,
was Alp-like, and, through what was also there,
such that all eyes would be repelled by it.
As is that downfall on the hither side
of Trent, which sidewise smote the dige,
through earthquake or through failure of support;
since from the mountains summit, whence it moved
down to the plain, the rock is shattered so,
that it would yield a path for one above;
even such was the descent of that ravine;
and on the border of the broken bank
was stretched at length the Infamy of Crete,
who in the seeming heifer was conceived;
and when he saw us there he bit himself,
like one whom inward anger overcomes.
In his direction then my Sage cried out:
Dost thou, perhaps, think Athens duke is here,
who gave thee death when in the world above?
Begone, thou beast! for this man cometh not
taught by thy sister, but is going by,
in order to behold your punishments.
[[129]]
As doth a bull, who from his leash breaks free
the moment he receives the mortal blow,
and cannot walk, but plunges here and there;
so doing I beheld the Minotaur;
and he, aware, cried out: Run to the pass!
t is well that, while he rages, thou descend.
Thereat we made our way adown that heap
of fallen rocks, which often neath my feet
were moved, because of their unwonted load.
I went along in thought; and he: Perchance
thou thinkest of this landslide, which is guarded
by that beasts anger which I quenched just now.
Now I would have thee know that, when down here
to nether Hell I came, that other time,
this mass of rock had not yet fallen down.
But certainly, if I remember well,
not long ere He arrived, who carried off
from Dis the highest circles mighty prey,
on every side the deep and foul abyss
so trembled that I thought the universe
had felt the love, whereby, as some believe,
the world to Chaos hath been oft reduced;
and at that moment this old mass of rock
was thus, both here and elsewhere, overthrown.
But turn thine eyes down yonder now; for lo,
the stream of blood is drawing near to us,
wherein boils who by violence harms others.
[[131]]
O blind cupidity, O foolish wrath,
that so dost in our short life goad us on,
and after, in the eternal, steep us thus!
I saw a wide moat curving in an arc,
and such that it embraces all the plain,
according as my Escort had informed me;
and in a file, between it and the bank,
Centaurs were running by, with arrows armed,
as in the world it was their wont to hunt.
On seeing us descend, they all stopped short,
and three of them detached them from the troop,
with bows and arrows they had chosen first.
And one cried from afar: Ye that descend
the slope, to what pain are ye coming?
Tell it from there, or else I draw my bow.
My Teacher said: Our answer will we give
to Chiron yonder, when we reach his side;
thus ever to thy harm was thy will rash.
He touched me then, and said: That one is Nessus,
who died for lovely Dejaniras sake,
and who himself wrought vengeance for himself;
the middle one, who gazes at his breast,
is that great Chiron who brought up Achilles;
the other, Pholus, who so wrathful was.
They go by thousands round about the moat,
shooting each soul that from the blood emerges
further than its own sin allotted it.
[[133]]
To those swift-footed beasts we then drew near;
Chiron an arrow took, and with its notch
backward upon his jaws he pushed his beard.
When he had thus uncovered his great mouth,
he said unto his mates: Are ye aware
that he who comes behind moves what he touches?
Yet dead mens feet are not thus wont to do.
And my good Leader, who now reached his breast,
where the two natures are together joined,
replied: He lives indeed, and thus alone
must I needs show to him the dark abyss;
necessity is leading him, not pleasure.
One who withdrew from singing praise to God,
gave me this new commission; he is not
a highwayman, nor I a robbers soul.
But by the Power, through whom I move my steps
along so wild a road, bestow on us
one of thy troop, at whose side we may be,
and who may show us where one fords, and carry
this man upon his back, for he is not
a spirit who can travel through the air.
Upon his right breast Chiron turned, and said
to Nessus: Turn around, and guide them thus,
and if another troop should meet you, cause it
to stand aside. Then we with this safe escort
skirted the edge of that red, boiling stream,
wherein the boiled were crying out aloud.
[[135]]
I saw some people in it to their brows.
These tyrants are, the mighty Centaur said,
who took to bloodshed and to plundering.
Here tears are shed because of heartless wrongs;
here Alexander is, and who for years
grieved Sicily, fierce Dionysius.
The brow which hath so black a head of hair,
is Azzolino; the other which is blond,
Obizzo of Este, who in truth was quenched
up in the world by his un-natural son.
I turned then toward the Poet, but he said:
Be he now first to thee, and second I.
A little further on the Centaur stopped
over some people who, it seemed, emerged
out of that boiling river from their necks.
On one side there a lonely shade he showed us,
and said: He yonder in Gods bosom pierced
the heart, which still is honored on the Thames.
Then people I beheld who from the stream
held out their heads, and even all their chest;
and many did I recognize of these.
Thus shallower and shallower became
that blood, until it only cooked their feet;
here was the place for us to ford the ditch.
Even as thou seest that the boiling stream
grows shallow more and more on this side here,
the Centaur said, I wish thee to believe
[[137]]
that on this other side its bottom sinks
increasingly, until it joins the place
where it behooveth tyranny to groan.
Justice Divine is over here tormenting
that Attila who was a scourge on earth,
Pyrrhus, and Sextus; and forever milks
the tears, which with the boiling it unlocks,
from Rinier da Corneto and Rinier Pazzo,
who on the highroads waged so great a war.
He then turned back, and crossed the ford again.
[[139]]
INFERNO XIII

The Seventh Circle. The Second Ring. Violence against

Oneself. Suicides and Squanderers

Not yet had Nessus reached the other side,
when we had set our steps within a wood,
which was not marked by any path whatever.
No green leaves there, but leaves of gloomy hue;
no smooth and straight, but gnarled and twisted, twigs;
nor was there any fruit, but poison-thorns.
No thickets rough and dense as these are owned
by those wild beasts, that hate the tilled estates
that lie between the Ccina and Corneto.
Herein those ugly Harpies make their nest,
who drove the Trojans from the Strophades,
with gloomy prophecies of future loss.
Wide wings they have, and human necks and faces;
their feet are clawed, and feathered their great bellies;
they utter wailings on the uncouth trees.
My kindly Teacher then began to say:
Before thou enter any further, know
that in the second ring thou art, and wilt be,
until thou reach the horrid plain of sand;
hence look around thee well, and things thou lt see,
that from my words would take away belief.
[[141]]
Moans I heard uttered upon every side,
but saw no person who might make them there;
hence, utterly confused, I checked my steps.
I think he thought I thought that all those voices
were uttered from among those thorny trunks
by people hiding there on our account.
The Teacher therefore said: If thou break off
a little twig from any of these trees,
the thoughts thou hast will all be proven false.
I then stretched out my hand a little way,
and from a sturdy thorn-tree plucked a twig,
whereat its trunk cried out: Why dost thou rend me?
Then, after growing dark with blood, its cry
began again: Why dost thou break me off?
Hast thou no spirit of compassion in thee?
Men were we once, and now are stocks become;
thy hand ought surely to have had more pity,
even if the souls of serpents we had been.
As from a fresh, green log, that at one end
is being burned, and at the other drips
and makes a hissing with the escaping air;
so from the broken twig together issued
both words and blood; I therefore dropped the end,
and stood dumbfounded, like a man who fears.
Had he before been able to believe,
O wounded soul, replied my Sage to him,
what in my verses only he has seen,
[[143]]
he had not set his hand on thee; whereas
the things incredibility has made me
lead him to do what I myself regret.
But tell him who thou wast, that he, by way
of compensation, may refresh thy fame
up in the world, where he can still return.
The trunk: With sweet words thou dost so entice me,
that I can not keep still; be not annoyed,
if I am tempted to a little talk.
I am the man who once held both the keys
of Fredericks heart, and he who turned them round
so gently, locking and unlocking it,
that most men from his secrets I withheld;
so faithful was I to my glorious charge,
that for its sake I lost both sleep and strength.
The courtesan who never turned away
her harlot eyes from Caesars dwelling-place,
a common form of death and vice of courts,
gainst me inflamed the minds of every one;
and those on fire inflamed Augustus so,
that my glad honors turned to wretched grief.
My mind, to vent its feelings of disdain,
and thinking to avoid disdain by death,
made me unjust against myself, the just.
By this trees uncouth roots, I swear to you,
I never broke the faith I owed my lord,
who so deserving was of reverence!
[[145]]
And to the world should one of you return,
let him assist my memory, which still
lies crushed beneath the blow which envy gave it!
A while he waited, then the Poet said:
Since he is still, lose not thy chance; but speak,
and ask him other questions, if thou like.
Whence I to him: Ask thou again whateer
thou thinkest satisfactory to me;
for I could not, such pity stirs my heart!
Hence he began again: So may this man
do freely for thee what thy words request,
imprisoned spirit, may it please thee still
to tell us how within these knotted trunks
a soul is bound; and tell us, if thou canst,
if any from such limbs is ever freed.
Thereat the trunk blew hard, and afterward
that wind was changed into the following words:
Briefly shall a reply be made to you.
Whenever a wild spirit leaves the body,
from which itself hath torn itself away,
Minos commits it to the seventh ravine.
Into the wood it falls, nor is a place
allotted to it; but where Fortune hurls it,
there, like a grain of spelt, it germinates.
It grows into a sapling and wild tree;
the Harpies, feeding then upon its leaves,
cause pain to it, and for the pain a vent.
[[147]]
Like other spirits, for our spoils we ll come,
though not that any be reclothed therewith;
for t is not right to have what one casts off.
We ll drag them with us here, and then our bodies
will all around the dismal wood be hung,
each on the thorn-tree of its hostile shade.
We still were giving heed unto the trunk,
believing that it wished to tell us more,
when we were startled by a sudden noise,
as likewise he is, who perceives a boar
and pack of hounds approach his hunting-post,
and hears the crashing of the beasts and boughs.
And lo, two on the left, who naked were
and scratched, and fled away so rapidly,
they shattered all the branches of the wood.
The one ahead: Now hurry, hurry, death!
and the other one, who thought himself too slow,
cried: Lano, not so knowing were thy legs,
when running from Del Toppos battle-jousts!
And then, perhaps because of failing breath,
he there made of himself and of a bush
a group. The wood behind these two was full
of swarthy bitches, ravenous and fleet
as greyhounds are, when from their chains unleashed.
Into the one who crouched they set their teeth,
and tore him into pieces bit by bit;
they then made off with those his suffering limbs.
[[149]]
Thereat my Escort took me by the hand,
and led me to the bush, which all in vain
out of its bleeding rents was shedding tears.
O Gicomo it said, da SantAndrea,
what boots it thee to make a screen of me?
and how am I to blame for thy bad life?
When over him my Teacher stopped, he said:
Who then wast thou, that through so many gashes
art blowing forth with blood such painful speech?
And he to us: O spirits that have come
in time to see the unbecoming havoc,
which from me thus hath torn away my leaves,
collect them at the foot of my sad bush!
I to that town belonged, which for the Baptist
changed its first patron; wherefore he, for this,
will always make her mournful with his art;
and were it not that on the Arnos bridge
there lingers still some little glimpse of him,
those townsmen who rebuilt her afterward
over the ashes left by Attila,
had caused that work to be performed in vain.
I made myself a gibbet of my house.
[[151]]
INFERNO XIV

The Seventh Circle. The Third Ring

Violence against God. Blasphemers

Since love for my own native place constrained me,
I gathered up the scattered twigs and leaves,
and gave them back to him who now was weak.
Thence to the bound we came, where from the third
the second ring is severed, and wherein
a frightful form of Justice may be seen.
To manifest aright what here was new,
I say that we had reached a barren plain,
which from its bed removeth every plant.
The woeful wood is as a garland round it,
as round the former is the dismal moat;
there on its very edge we stayed our steps.
Its soil was of a dense and arid sand,
whose nature differed in no way from that,
which once was trodden by the feet of Cato.
Vengeance of God, how much by every one
thou oughtest to be feared, who readeth here
what to these eyes of mine was manifest!
Of naked souls I many flocks beheld,
who all wept very sorely, while on each
a different law appeared to be imposed.
[[153]]
A few lay on the ground upon their backs;
and some were seated cuddled up together,
while others moved about continually.
Most numerous were those that moved around,
and least so those that under torment lay,
but all the freer had their tongues to wail.
Down on the whole great waste of sand there rained
with gentle fall dilated flakes of fire,
like flakes of snow that fall on windless Alps.
As were the flames which Alexander saw
in Indias torrid regions, as they fell
upon his hosts, unbroken to the ground;
 and this he met, by ordering his troops
to trample on the soil, because the flames,
when single, were more easily put out 
even such descended here the eternal heat,
whereby the sand was set on fire, as tinder
is kindled under steel, to double pain.
And ever without resting was the dance
of wretched hands, that kept, now here, now there,
slapping away each latest burning flake.
Thou, Teacher, I began, that conquerest all,
except the stubborn devils who came out
against us at the entrance of the gate,
who is that great one who seems not to mind
the fire, but lies there scornful and awry,
so that the rain seems not to ripen him?
[[155]]
And that same one, who had observed that I
concerning him was questioning my Leader,
cried: As I was alive, such am I dead!
If Jove should tire that smith of his, from whom,
in wrath, he took the pointed thunderbolt,
wherewith I smitten was that final day;
or should he tire the others, each in turn,
in Mongibellos smithy black with smoke,
by calling out: Help, help, good Vulcan, help!
even as he did on Phlegras battle-field;
and should he shoot at me with all his might,
no glad revenge would he obtain thereby!
Thereat my Leader spoke with so much force,
that I had never heard him use the like:
In that thine arrogance, O Capaneus,
is not extinguished, art thou all the more
chastised; no torment, saving thine own rage,
were for thy furious pride a fitting pain.
Then with a gentler mien he turned to me,
and said: One of the seven kings was he,
who Thebes besieged; he held, and seems to hold
God in disdain, and little seems to prize Him;
but, as I told him, his own spitefulness
is fit enough adornment for his breast.
Now follow me, and see that thou meanwhile
set not thy feet upon the burning sand,
but to the thicket keep them ever close.
[[157]]
In silence we went on, and came to where,
out of the wood a little stream spirts forth,
whose ruddy color makes me shudder still.
As from the Bulicm springs a brook,
which afterward the sinful women share,
even so went that one down across the sand.
Its bottom and both sides had turned to stone,
as also had the embankments on each side;
I hence perceived the crossing-place was there.
Of all the other things which I have shown thee
since first we entered through the outer gate,
whose threshold unto no one is denied,
nothing has ever by thine eyes been seen
as notable as is this present brook,
which deadens oer itself all little flames.
These were my Leaders words; I therefore begged
that he would freely grant to me the food,
desire of which he had so freely given.
Amid the sea there lies a wasted land,
he told me thereupon, whose name is Crete,
under whose king the world of old was pure.
There is a mountain there, which, happy once
with waters and green leaves, was Ida called;
t is now abandoned like a thing outworn.
Whilom as trusty cradle for her son
Rhea selected it, and when he wept,
to hide him better, caused a shouting there.
[[159]]
Within that mountain stands a great Old Man,
who holds his shoulders toward Damiata turned,
and who, as at his mirror, looks at Rome.
His head is formed of finest gold, his arms
and breast are of the purest silver, then,
as far as to his loins, he s made of brass;
all chosen iron is he down from there,
save that baked clay his right foot is, and straighter
he stands on that, than on the other foot.
Each of these parts, except the golden one,
is broken by a cleft, whence trickle tears,
which, when collected, perforate that cave.
From rock to rock they course into this vale;
then Acheron with Styx and Phlegethon
they form, and through this narrow duct descend
as far as where one goes no further down;
they form Cocytus there; and what that pool
is like, thou lt see; hence here it is not told.
And I to him: If thus this present stream
hs from our world descended, why alone
on this rings edge hath it appeared to us?
And he: Thou knowest that the place is round,
and though a long way thou hast gone already,
eer to the left descending toward the bottom,
through the whole circle thou hast not yet gone;
wherefore, if aught that s new appear to us,
it should not bring amazement to thy face.
[[161]]
And I again: But where are Phlegethon
and Lethe, Teacher? For, of this one silent,
thou sayst the other of this rain is made.
And he replied: Thou certainly dost please me
in all thy questions, but the red streams boiling
ought surely to have answered one of them.
Lethe thou lt see, but there, outside this cave,
whither souls go to wash themselves, when once
their sin, repented of, has been removed.
And then he said: It now is time for us
to leave the wood; see that thou follow me;
the banks, which are not burned, afford a path;
and up above them every flame is quenched.
[[163]]
INFERNO XV

The Seventh Circle. The Third Ring

Violence against Nature. Sodomites

One of the hard embankments bears us now,
and overhead the brooks mist shades them so,
that from the fire it saves the stream and banks.
Such bulwarks as, to keep the sea away,
the Flemings make between Witsand and Bruges,
through fearing lest the high-tide break upon them;
and as the Paduans make along the Brenta,
their villages and strongholds to defend,
ere Chiarentana feel the summer heat;
in such a way were those embankments made,
although the master did not make them there
so high or thick, whoeer he may have been.
So far we were already from the wood,
that I could not have seen just where it was,
even had I turned around to look behind,
when we a band of spirits met, who came
along the bank, each one of whom looked hard
at us, as in the evening one is wont
to look at people, when the moon is new;
and toward us they were knitting close their brows,
as an old tailor at his needles eye.
[[165]]
When by that gathering I had thus been eyed,
one of them, who had recognized me, seizing
my garments hem, exclaimed: How wonderful!
And I, when toward me he had stretched his arm,
fastened upon his roasted face mine eyes,
so that, though blistered, it did not prevent
mine intellect from recognizing him;
and downward having bent my face toward his,
I answered him: Are you here, Ser Brunetto?
And that one: O my son, be not displeased
should Brunetto Latini a little way
turn back with thee, and let the troop go on.
I beg you to with all my power; said I,
and if you d have me sit with you, I will,
if it please that one; for with him I go.
O son, he said, whoever of this herd
stands still at all, lies prone a hundred years,
nor shields himself when smitten by the fire.
Therefore go on; I ll follow at thy skirts,
and then I ll join again my company,
which goes bewailing its eternal loss.
I dared not from the path descend, to go
upon his level there; but held my head
bowed down, like one who walks in reverence.
And he began: What fortune or what fate
before thy last day leadeth thee down here,
and who is he that showeth thee the way?
[[167]]
I answered him: When in the life serene
up yonder, in a vale I lost my way,
before my age had rounded out its noon.
Thereon I turned my back but yestermorn;
this one, as I returned to it, appeared
to me, and oer this path now leads me home.
And he to me: If thine own star thou follow,
thou canst not fail to reach a glorious port,
if in the lovely life I judged aright;
and had I not so prematurely died,
I, seeing Heaven so well disposed toward thee,
had given thee comfort in thy work. But that
ungrateful, wicked people, which of old
came down from Fisol, and which een now
smacks of the mountain and of hard grey stone,
for thy well-doing shall become thy foe;
and rightly, for among the acid sorbs
it is not fitting that sweet figs bear fruit.
An old fame in the world proclaims them blind,
a greedy, envious, overweening folk;
see to it that thou cleanse thee from their ways!
Thy fortune hath in store for thee such honor,
that either party shall be hungry for thee;
but distant from the goat shall be the grass.
Let, then, the beasts of Fisol make litter
with their own selves, nor let them touch the plant,
if on their dungheap any burgeon still,
[[169]]
in which the sacred seed may live again
of those old Romans who remained therein,
when of such wickedness the nest was made!
If perfectly fulfilled had been my prayer,
I then replied to him, you had not yet
been banished from the natural life of man;
for in my mind is fixed, and stirs een now
my heart, that dear and kind paternal face
you showed, when in the world from time to time
you taught me how man makes himself eternal;
and how much gratitude I feel for this,
must, while I live, be in my words perceived.
What of my course you tell, I write, and keep,
with other texts, for a Lady to explain,
who can, if ever I attain to her.
I only wish that this be clear to you,
that I, if but my conscience chide me not,
am ready for whatever Fortune wills.
Not new unto mine ears is such reward;
hence, as she lists, let Fortune turn her wheel,
and let the country clown his mattock ply!
Thereat my Teacher over his right cheek
turned back, and looked at me; and then he said:
He listens well, who giveth heed to this.
Nor speaking less do I, on this account,
go on with Ser Brunetto, asking who
his fellows were, of greatest note and rank.
[[171]]
And he to me: T is well to know of some;
our silence on the rest will merit praise,
for short the time were for so long a talk.
Know then, in brief, that clerics were they all,
and mighty men of letters of great fame,
soiled by the self same sin when in the world.
And with that sad crowd yonder Priscian goes,
and Francis of Accorso, too; and him,
if thou hadst had a longing for such scurf,
thou couldst have seen there, whom the servants Servant
changed from the Arno to the Bacchiglin,
where he behind him left his ill-strained nerves.
I d speak of more; but I can come and talk
no further, for a new dust-cloud I see
rising oer yonder from the sandy plain.
People, with whom I must not be, are coming;
let my Tesoro, in which I m still alive,
be recommended thee; I ask no more.
Then round he turned, and seemed to be of those
who at Verona run across the meadow
to win the green cloth; and of these he seemed
not he who loses, but the one who wins.
[[173]]
INFERNO XVI

The Seventh Circle. The Third Ring

Violence against Nature. Sodomites

I now was where the booming of the water,
which fell into the following round, was heard
like the dull, buzzing sound which bee-hives make;
when three shades separated from a group,
which neath the rains tormenting punishment
was passing by, and ran along together.
Toward us they came, and each of them cried out:
Stop, thou, that by thy garb dost seem to us
a citizen of our corrupted town!
Alas, what wounds I saw upon their limbs,
both old and recent, by the flames burnt in!
It pains me still but to remember them.
My Leader, giving heed to these their cries,
turned his face round toward me, and said: Now wait!
To those men yonder courtesy is due;
and, were not for the fire, which, arrow-like,
the nature of the place shoots forth, I d say
that haste were more becoming thee than them.
And they, when we had stopped, began again
their old refrain; and after they had reached us,
all three of them made of themselves a wheel.
[[175]]
As champions oiled and nude are wont to do,
when looking for an advantageous grip,
before they come to giving blows and wounds;
thus, as he wheeled, each turned his face toward me,
so that his feet continuous journey made
in opposite direction to his neck.
And one began: Even if the wretched nature
of this soft place, and our burned, shrivelled faces
bring us and our requests into contempt,
still let our reputation bend thy mind
to tell us who thou art, that dost so safely
rub on the soil of Hell thy living feet.
He, in whose footprints thou dost see me tread,
was, though he go both nude and hairless now,
of higher rank then thou believest him.
He was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;
his name was Guido Guerra, and when alive,
his wisdom and his sword accomplished much.
The other, who behind me treads the sand,
Tegghiio Aldobrandi is, whose voice
should have been welcomed in the world above.
And I, who with them am tormented here,
Icopo Rusticucci was; and surely
my shrewish wife than aught else hurts me more.
If I had been protected from the fire,
I would have lept into their midst below,
and I believe my Leader had allowed it.
[[177]]
But since I should have burned and baked myself,
fear was victorious over my good will,
which made me eager to embrace them there.
I then began: Your state impressed within me
not scorn, but so much pain, that only late
will all of it entirely disappear,
as soon as this my Lord said words to me,
because of which I thought within myself
that there were people coming such as you.
Of your own town am I, and evermore
have I your doings and your honored names
related, and heard mentioned, with regard.
I leave the gall, and for the sweet fruit go,
which my veracious Leader promised me;
but to the center must I first descend.
So may thy spirit lead thy members long,
the former thereupon replied to me,
and, after thou art gone, thy fame be bright,
tell me if courtesy and worth abide
within our town, as they were wont to do,
or whether they have wholly gone from it;
for Guglielmo Borsier, who but newly
has been in pain with us, and with our mates
goes yonder, grieves us greatly with his words.
The people newly come, and sudden gains,
have bred in thee such pride and such excess,
that, Florence, thou art even now in pain!
[[179]]
Thus with uplifted face I cried; whereat
the three, who this as answer understood,
looked at each other, as one looks at truth.
If satisfying others other times
cost thee so little, happy thou, that thus
at thy sweet will dost speak! they all replied.
Hence,  so mayst thou, from these dark places saved,
return to see the lovely stars again, 
when saying I was there shall do thee good,
see that thou tell the people about us.
They then broke up their wheel, and in their flight
it seemed as if their nimble legs were wings.
Amen could not have been as quickly said,
as they then disappeared; my Teacher, therefore,
thought it advisable for us to leave.
I followed him, and not far had we gone,
before the waters noise was so near by,
that, had we spoken, we had not been heard.
And as the stream, which is the first that eastward
from Monte Veso takes a separate course
upon the left slope of the Apennines,
and which above is Acquacheta called,
before it flows into its lowly bed,
and at Forl is of that name deprived,
booms loud, because of falling oer a cliff
above San Benedetto of the Alp,
where for a thousand there should refuge be;
[[181]]
even thus, as oer a precipice it fell,
we found that colored water roaring so,
that very soon it would have hurt our ears.
I had a cord around about me girt,
wherewith I once had thought that I could capture
the Leopard with the brightly colored hide.
When from me I had wholly loosened it,
even as my Leader had commanded me,
I coiled it up and held it out to him.
Thereat upon his right he turned around,
and hurled it to some distance from the edge
down into that profound and dark abyss.
Surely some strange new thing must needs reply
said I within myself, to this strange signal,
which with his eye my Teacher follows thus.
Ah, with what caution men should deal with those,
who see not only what is done by others,
but with their wisdom see into their thoughts!
He said to me: What I am waiting for,
and what thy thought now dreams, will soon come up;
soon to thy vision will it be revealed.
Eer to a truth that hath a falsehoods face
ought one to close his lips as best he can,
for, though one faultless be, it brings him shame;
but I can not suppress it here; hence, Reader,
even by the verses of this Comedy,
so may they not be void of lasting favor,
[[183]]
I swear to thee, that through that coarse, dark air
I saw a shape, which would have chilled with wonder
however brave a heart, come swimming up,
as he returns, who, going down at times
to clear an anchor clinging to a reef,
or aught else lying hidden in the sea,
above extends, and draweth in below.
[[185]]
INFERNO XVII

The Seventh Circle. The Third Ring

Violence against Art. Usurers

Behold the wild beast with the pointed tail,
which, crossing mountains, breaks through walls and armor;
behold who sickens all the world with stench!
My Leader thus began to speak to me,
and signalled to it to approach the edge,
near where the marble we had traversed ended.
And that foul image of deceit came on,
and landed on the bank its head and chest;
but oer the edge it drew not up its tail.
Its face was as the face of a just man,
so pleasing outwardly was its complexion;
the body of a serpent all the rest.
Two paws it had, all hairy to the arm-pits;
its back and breast, as well as both its sides,
were painted oer with snares and wheel-like shields.
Neer with more colors in its woof and warp
did Turks or Tartars manufacture cloth,
nor by Arachnne were such webs designed.
As flat-boats sometimes lie upon the shore,
in water partly, partly on the land;
and as among the greedy Germans yonder,
[[187]]
the beaver seats himself to wage his war;
so lay that worst of beasts upon the edge
which closes in the sandy plain with stone.
All of its tail was quivering in the void,
and twisting upward its envenomed fork,
which like a scorpions weapon armed its tip.
Our path must turn aside a little now,
my Leader said to me, until we reach
that wicked beast reclining over there.
Around our right breast, therefore, we went down,
and took ten paces on the very edge,
thus surely to avoid both sand and fire;
and after we had come to it, I saw,
upon the sand a little further on,
some people sitting near the precipice.
My Teacher then: That thou mayst take with thee
a full experience of this ring, go on,
and see the nature of the life they lead.
There be thy conversation brief; meanwhile,
till thou return, I ll talk with this wild beast,
that its strong shoulders may be yielded us.
Thus further on, along the outer edge
of that seventh circle, all alone I went,
to where the melancholy people sat.
Out of their eyes their woe was bursting forth;
first here, then there, they helped them with their hands,
now from the flames, now from the heated soil.
[[189]]
Not otherwise do dogs in summer-time,
now with their paws, and with their muzzles now,
wheneer by flees, or flies, or gadflies bitten.
When on the face of some I set mine eyes,
on whom the woeful fire is falling there,
I knew not one of them; but I perceived
that from the neck of each there hung a pouch,
which had a certain color and design,
wherewith their eyes appeared to feed themselves.
And as I, looking, came into their midst,
azure upon a yellow pouch I saw,
which had the form and semblance of a lion.
Then, as my gaze continued on its course,
another I beheld, as red as blood,
exhibiting a goose more white than butter.
And one of them, who had his small white pouch
emblazoned with an azure pregnant sow,
said to me: What dost thou in this our ditch?
Now go thy way; and since thou livest still,
know that my fellow townsman, Vitaliano,
will sit beside me here upon my left.
I, with these Florentines, a Paduan am,
and very frequently they stun my ears
by shouting: Let the sovereign knight arrive,
who ll bring with him the pocket with three beaks!
Herewith his mouth he twisted, sticking out
his tongue, as doth an ox that licks its nose.
[[191]]
And I, afraid lest any longer stay
might anger him who warned me to be brief,
turned from those weary spirits back again.
I found my Leader, who had climbed already
upon the back of that fierce animal,
and said to me: Now be thou strong and bold!
By stairs like these shall we descend hereafter;
climb thou in front, for midst I wish to be,
so that the tail may do no injury.
Like one with quartan-fevers chill so near,
that pale already are his finger nails,
and that, but looking at the shade, he shudders;
such at the words he uttered I became;
but that shame made its threats to me, which renders
a servant strong when in a good lords presence.
As on those horrid shoulders I sat down,
I wished to tell him: See that thou embrace me!
my voice, however, came not as I thought.
But he, who succoured me at other times
and other straights, as soon as I was up,
encircled and sustained me with his arms;
and then he said: Now, Geryon, move thou on!
Wide be thy wheels, and gradual thy descent;
bethink thee of the unwonted load thou hast.
As from its mooring place a little boat
backs slowly out, even so did he withdraw;
and when he wholly felt himself in play,
[[193]]
to where his breast had been, he turned his tail,
and moved the latter, stretched out like an eel,
while with his paws he gathered in the air.
I do not think that there was greater fear
when Phathon let go his horses reins,
whereby, as still appears, the sky was burned;
nor yet when wretched Icarus perceived
his back unfeathering through the melting wax,
while, calling him, his father cried: Thou holdst
an evil course! than mine was, when I saw
that I was in the air on every side,
and gone the sight of all things save the beast.
The latter, swimming, slowly wends his way,
wheels and descends, but I perceive it not,
save by the wind below and in my face.
The waterfall I now heard on the right,
making a horrid roar beneath us; hence,
I outward thrust my head with eyes turned down.
More fearful of the abyss I then became,
for fires I now beheld, and wailings heard;
hence, trembling, I clung closer with my thighs.
And then, for I perceived it not before,
by the great torments which on divers sides
drew near, I saw our wheeling and descent.
Even as a falcon long upon the wing,
which, without seeing lure or game-bird, makes
the falconer say: Alas, thou comest down!
[[195]]
descendeth weary, through a hundred rings,
whence he had swiftly started, and alights
far from his lord in angry sullenness;
so likewise Geryon set us down below,
close to the bottom of the rough-hewn rock;
and, of our persons rid, as fast as flies
an arrow from a bowstring, sped away.
[[197]]
INFERNO XVIII

The Eighth Circle. Fraud. The First Trench. Pandars and Seducers. The Second Trench. Flatterers and Prostitutes

A place there is in Hell, called Malebolg,
wholly of stone, and of an iron hue,
as is the round wall which encircles it.
Right in the midst of its malicious field
yawneth a well exceeding wide and deep,
of whose construction, in its place, I ll speak.
Round, therefore, is the girdle which remains
between the well and that hard, high walls base,
and ten great trenches subdivide its bed.
As is the appearance which, where many moats
encircle castles for the walls protection,
the section where they are presents;
such was the one those trenches furnished here;
and just as in such fortresses small bridges
stretch from their thresholds to the outmost bank;
so crags ran from the bottom of the cliff
across the banks and trenches to the well,
which, gathering them together, cuts them off.
In this place, then, we found ourselves, when dropped
from Geryons back; the Poet thereupon
held to the left, and I behind him moved.
[[199]]
Upon the right side I beheld new cause
for sympathy, new pains, and scourgers new,
wherewith the first trench was completely filled.
Down at its bottom naked were the sinners;
this side the middle facing us they came,
beyond it with us, but with quicker steps;
means such as those which at the Jubilee
the Romans took, because of its great throng,
to have the people pass across the bridge,
who toward the Castle all on one side face,
and toward Saint Peters go their way; while all
move toward the mountain on the other edge.
This side and that, upon the dark, stone floor,
horned demons with great scourges I beheld,
who from behind were fiercely whipping them.
Ah, how they caused them to lift them up their heels,
when by the first blows smitten! Certainly
none waited for the second, or the third.
While I was going on, mine eyes were met
by one of them; and instantly I said:
I fast not from a previous sight of him.
To make him out I therefore stayed my feet;
and, having stopped with me, my gentle Leader
assented to my going back a little.
That scourged one thought that he could hide himself
by looking down, but little it availed him;
for Thou, that castest down thine eyes, said I,
[[201]]
unless the features which thou hast are false,
Vendico Caccianimico art;
but what brings thee into such pungent sauces?
And he to me: Unwillingly I tell it;
but forced I am by thy transparent speech,
which makes me recollect the olden world.
I was the one who led Ghisolabella
to do according to the Marquis will,
however the disgusting tale be told.
Nor am I here the only Bolognese
that weeps; nay, this place is so full of us,
that not so many tongues are taught today
between Savena and Reno to say sipa;
and if thereof thou wouldst have pledge or proof,
recall to mind our avaricious breasts.
As thus he spoke, a demon with his lash
smote him, and said to him: Pandar, begone!
There are no women here to sell for coin.
I then rejoined my Escort; whereupon,
when we had taken some few steps, we came
to where a crag projected from the bank.
This we ascended with the greatest ease,
and turning to the right along its ridge,
we left those everlasting circling walls.
When we were where it hollows out below,
to let the scourged pass through, my Leader said:
Now stay thy steps, and on thee let the sight
[[203]]
of all these other ill-born spirits strike,
whose faces thou hast not perceived as yet,
because they ve gone with us in our direction.
As from the ancient bridge we watched the troop,
which on the other side was toward us coming,
and which the scourge was likewise driving on,
without my asking, my good Teacher said:
Look at that great man there, who, as he comes,
for all his pain, seems not to shed a tear.
How royal an appearance he still keeps!
Jason is he, who, by his doughtiness
and wit, deprived the Colchians of their ram.
He passed the isle of Lemmos on his way,
after its pitiless and daring women
had given up to death their every male.
With tokens of his love and flattering words
he there deceived the maid, Hypspyl,
who previously had all the rest deceived.
He left her there with child, and all alone;
him to this punishment that fault condemns;
and for Medea, too, is vengeance wrought.
With him go those that in this way deceive;
be this enough to know of this first ditch,
and of those, too, that in its fangs it holds.
Already were we where the narrow path
forms with the second bank a cross, and makes
therewith abutments for another arch.
[[205]]
We thence heard people in the following trench
who whined and groaned, and with their muzzles puffed,
while smiting their own bodies with their palms.
The banks were crusted over with a mould
by vapor from below, which, sticking there,
offensive to both eyes and nose became.
So deep the bottom, that there is no means
of looking into it, unless one climb
the archs summit, where the crag is highest.
Thither we came, and from it in the ditch
people I saw immersed in excrement,
which seemed from human privies to have come.
While peering with mine eyes down there, I saw
a head so foul with filth, that whether clerks
or laymans head it were, was not apparent.
Scolding, he said: Why greedier art thou
to look at me, than at the other foul ones?
And I: Because, if I remember well,
I ve seen thee with dry hair ere now, for thou
Alssio Intermini of Lucca art;
that s why I eye thee more than all the rest.
And he then, as he beat upon his pate:
Those flatteries immersed me here below,
wherewith my tongue was never surfeited.
Then, after this, my Leader said to me:
See that thou urge thy glance a little further,
that with thine eyes thou quite attain the face
[[207]]
of that disgusting and dishevelled wench,
who yonder claws herself with filthy nails,
and crouches now, and now is on her feet.
That Thas is, the prostitute, who answered
her paramour, when he had said Have I
great thanks from thee?: Nay, marvelously great!
Herewith, then, let our sight be satisfied.
[[209]]
INFERNO XIX

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Third Trench. Simoniacs

O Simon Magus, O his wretched followers,
since ye the things of God, which ought to be
the brides of righteousness, rapaciously
adulterate for silver and for gold;
it now behooves the trumpet sound for you,
for in the third great trench your station is!
We now had climbed the next tomb-spanning bridge,
and were on that part of the crag, which hangs
directly oer the middle of the trench.
Wisdom Supreme, how great the art thou showest
in Heaven, on earth, and in the evil world!
How justly, too, thy virtue makes awards!
I saw that on its sloping sides and bottom
the livid-colored stone was full of holes,
all of one width, while each of them was round.
Nor less nor more wide did they seem to me,
than those which in my beautiful Saint Johns
are made as places for baptizing priests;
and one of which, not many years ago,
I broke, to save one who was choking in it;
be this a witness undeceiving all!
[[211]]
Out of the mouth of each a sinners feet
protruded, and, as far as to the calf,
his legs; the rest of him remained within.
The soles of all were, both of them, on fire;
because of which their joints so strongly twitched,
they would have snapped green twigs and cords of grass.
And as a flame on oily things is wont
to move along the outer surface only;
so likewise was it there from heels to toes.
Who, Teacher, is he yonder, who is tortured
by twitching more than all the rest, his mates,
said I, and whom a redder flame is sucking?
And he to me: If thou wouldst have me bear thee
down yonder bank which lowest lies, from him
thou lt know both of himself and of his sins.
And I: What pleases thee I like; my lord
thou art, and that I part not from thy will
thou knowst, as also what is left unsaid.
We then upon the fourth embankment came,
and, turning round, descended on our left
into that narrow bottom pierced with holes;
nor yet did my good Teacher set me down
from off his back, but brought me to the hole
of him who grieved so sorely with his shank.
Whoeer thou art, sad soul, that holdest down
thine upper portion, planted like a stake,
I then began, say something, if thou canst.
[[213]]
I there was like a friar that confesses
a base assassin, who, on being planted,
calls him again, that death may be delayed.
And he cried out: Dost thou stand there already,
dost thou stand there already, Boniface?
By several years the writing lied to me.
Art thou so quickly sated with the wealth,
for which thou didst not fear to seize by fraud,
and outrage next, the Lady beautiful?
Even such did I become, as those are, who,
not understanding what is answered them,
deem themselves mocked, and think of no reply.
Then Virgil said: Tell him immediately:
I m not the one, I m not the one thou thinkest!
And I replied to him as I was bidden.
Whereat the spirit writhed with both his feet;
then, sighing, and with weeping voice, he said:
What is it, then, that thou dost ask of me?
If to know who I am concern thee so,
that for it thou hast crossed the bank; know, then,
that I was with the mighty Mantle clothed;
and verily the she-Bears son was I,
so eager to advance the cubs, that wealth
I pocketed up there, and here myself.
The others, who in working simony
preceded me, are gathered neath my head,
flattened between the fissures of the rock.
[[215]]
I, in like manner, shall down yonder fall,
when he arrives, whom I believed thou wast,
when I of thee the sudden question asked.
But now already longer is the time,
that I, thus up-side down, have cooked my feet,
than he will planted stay with ruddy soles;
for after him shall come from westward lands
a lawless shepherd of still uglier deed,
and fit to cover him and me. Renewed
shall Jason be, of whom in Maccabees
one reads; and as to that one his king yielded,
even so who governs France shall yield to this.
I know not whether I was here too bold,
in that I answered him in this strain only:
Now tell me, pray, how great the treasure was,
our Lord demanded of Saint Peter first,
before He placed the Keys in his control?
Surely he asked for naught but Follow me.
Nor yet did Peter or the rest take gold
or silver from Matthias, when by lot
he took the place the guilty soul had lost.
Therefore keep still, for thou art rightly punished;
and take good care of that ill-gotten wealth,
which caused thee to be valiant against Charles.
And were it not for this, that I am still
forbidden by reverence for the Keys supreme
thou hadst in keeping in the joyful life,
[[217]]
words of still greater weight would I employ;
because your greed, by trampling on the good
and raising the depraved, afflicts the world.
The Evangelist was thinking of your shepherds,
when she, who on the waters hath her seat,
was seen by him to fornicate with kings;
the one who with the seven heads was born,
and from the ten horns her support received,
while virtue still was pleasing to her spouse.
Ye ve made yourselves a god of gold and silver;
and from idolaters how differ ye,
save that they worship one, and ye a hundred?
Ah, Constantine, of how much ill was mother,
not thy conversion, but the dower-gift
the earliest wealthy Father took from thee!
While I was singing him such notes as these,
he, whether it were wrath or conscience bit him,
was fiercely kicking out with both his feet.
I verily believe it pleased my Leader,
he heeded with so glad a look throughout
the utterance of those true, clear words of mine.
He therefore took me up with both his arms,
and when he had me wholly on his breast,
he climbed again the path down which he came;
nor tired of holding me in his embrace,
but bore me to the summit of the arch,
which crosses from the fourth bank to the fifth.
[[219]]
When there, he gently set his burden down,
gently, because that crag was rough and steep,
and would be difficult for goats to cross;
from thence another trench was shown to me.
[[221]]
INFERNO XX

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Fourth Trench. Diviners and Soothsayers

About strange punishments must I make verses,
and furnish matter for the twentieth song
of this first lay, which treats of those submerged.
Already had I wholly given myself
to looking down at its uncovered bottom,
which with the tears of agony was bathed;
when people in the great round trench I saw
come weeping silently, and at the pace,
at which in this world litanies advance.
Then, as my sight fell on them lower down,
wondrously twisted each of them appeared
between the chin and where the chest begins;
for toward his loins his face was turned around,
and backward it behooved him to advance,
because of foresight they had been deprived.
By palsy some, perhaps, may thus have been
entirely turned around, but I ve not seen it,
nor do I think there ever was one such.
So may God let thee, Reader, gather fruit
from this thy reading, think now for thyself
how I could ever keep my own face dry,
[[223]]
when at close range I saw our human image
so twisted, that the weeping of the eyes
along the fissure bathed the back. Indeed,
as on a rock of that hard crag I leaned,
I wept so, that my Escort said to me:
Art thou still foolish as the others are?
Here liveth piety when wholly dead
is pity. Who, then, guiltier is than he
who lets his feelings judge Divine Decrees?
Lift, lift thy head, and see the man for whom,
before the Trojans eyes, the earth was opened!
whence all cried: Whither art thou rushing now,
Amphiarus? Why quittest thou the war?
and he ceased not from plunging headlong down
to Minos, who lays hold on every one.
See how he makes a bosom of his shoulders;
because he wished to see too far ahead,
he looks behind, and backward goes his way.
Behold Tiresias there, who changed his looks,
when female he became, from being male,
his members being each and all transformed;
and afterward he needs must strike again
the two entwining serpents with his rod,
ere he the plumage of a male regained.
He who to that ones belly turns his back,
is Aruns, who in Lunis mountain quarries,
where toils the Carrarese who dwells below,
[[225]]
among white marbles had as dwelling-place
a cave, from which his view was not cut off,
when at the stars he gazed, or at the sea.
And she who, yonder, with dishevelled locks
covers the breasts which thou dost not behold,
and has on that side all her hairy skin,
was Manto, who first searched through many lands,
then settled in the place where I was born;
thereof I d have thee hear me speak a little.
After her father had from life departed,
and Bacchus city had become enslaved,
she wandered long about the world. Up there
in lovely Italy, beneath the Alps
which oer the Tyrol lock out Germany,
there lies a lake which is Benco called.
From oer a thousand springs, I trow, tween Garda
and Val Camnica, the Pennine Alp
is bathed by waters which therein find rest.
A midway place there is, where Trentos shepherd,
and he of Brescia, and the Veronese,
might each his blessing give, if there he went.
Peschiera next, a fair and mighty fortress,
and fit to face both Bergamasks and Brescians,
sits where the shore lies lowest round about.
There all that in Bencos spacious lap
cannot be held, flows out of it perforce,
and down through verdant pastures forms a stream.
[[227]]
When once its water gathers head to run,
no more Benco, Mincio is its name,
till at Govrnolo it joins the Po.
Not long its course, before it finds low ground,
oer which it spreads, and, making it a marsh,
is wont at times to be unsound in summer.
Passing that way, the cruel virgin saw
a region in the middle of the fen,
untilled and naked of inhabitants.
There, to escape all human fellowship,
and work her arts, she settled with her slaves,
and lived, and there she left her empty body.
Thereafter men, who all around were scattered,
collected in that place, which was a strong one,
because it had a fen on every side.
Oer those dead bones of hers they built a town;
then, after her, who first picked out the site,
they called it Mantua, with no other lot.
The people in it were more numerous once,
before the foolishness of Casalodi
had been deceived by Pinamontes guile.
I charge thee, then, if eer thou hear it said
my town had its beginning otherwise,
permit no falsehood to defraud the truth.
Thy statements, Teacher, are so sure to me,
said I, and take such hold upon my faith,
that those of others would be burnt-out coals.
[[229]]
But tell me if among these passing people
thou seest any one deserving note;
for my mind now is wholly bent on that.
He told me then: The one who from his cheeks
extends his beard across his swarthy shoulders,
an augur was, when Greece lacked males so much,
that for her cradles only few were left;
t was he who set, with Chalcas aid, at Aulis
the time to cut the fleets first rope. His name
Eurpylus, and in a certain place
he thus is called by my high Tragedy;
this thou knowst well, who knowest all of it.
That other one, so thin about his flanks,
was Michael Scot, who surely understood
the artful game of magical deceits.
Guido Bonatti see; and see Asdente,
who wishes now that he had given heed
to cord and leather, but too late repents.
See the sad women who abandoned needles,
spindles and shuttles, to become diviners;
these wrought their spells with herbs and images.
But now come on, for Cain is with his thorns
holding the bounds of both the hemispheres,
and plays upon the waves below Seville,
and round already was the moon last night;
thou surely must recall it, since at times,
it harmed thee not, when in the dark woods depths.
Thus he to me, as, meanwhile, on we went.
[[231]]
INFERNO XXI

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Fifth Trench. Corrupt Politicians

Speaking of other things my Comedy
cares not to sing, we thus from bridge to bridge
moved on, and, when upon the summit, stopped,
in order to behold the next ravine
of Maleblg, and the next vain cries;
and I beheld it wonderfully dark.
And just such sticky pitch as that which boils
in the Venetians Arsenal in winter,
for calking up again the unsound ships,
which cannot then be sailed;  instead of which,
as one a new one builds, one plugs the ribs
of that which many voyages has made;
one hammers at the stern, and at the prow another;
one fashions oars, another cordage twists,
while still another mends a jib or mainsail; 
such was the coarse, dense pitch, which, not by fire,
but by an art divine, boiled there below,
and limed the bank on every side. I saw
the pitch, but nothing in it, save the bubbles
the boiling raised, and that the whole of it
kept swelling up, and settling back compressed.
[[233]]
While I was gazing fixedly down yonder,
my Leader cried to me: Beware, beware!
and drew me to himself from where I was.
I then turned round, as one who longs to see
the thing which it behooves him to escape,
and who, when by a sudden fear unmanned,
although he sees, delays not his departure;
and I perceived behind us a black devil
come running up along the rocky crag.
Ah, how ferocious in his looks he was,
and in his actions how severe he seemed,
with wings outspread, and light upon his feet!
His shoulder, which was sharp and high, was loaded
with both a sinners haunches, whom he held
clutched tightly by the sinews of his feet.
O Malebranche, from our bridge he cried,
here s one of Santa Zitas Ancients! Put him
beneath, for I m for more of them returning
to that town which I have well stocked therewith;
there, save Bonturo, every one s a grafter;
a No for money there becomes a Yes.
He hurled him down, and oer the rugged crag
returned; and never was a mastif loosed
with so much hurry to pursue a thief.
The other sank, and then rose doubled up;
those fiends, though, who were sheltered by the bridge,
cried: Here the Holy Face availeth not!
[[235]]
One here swims otherwise than in the Serchio!
If, therefore, thou dost not desire our hooks,
protrude not from the surface of the pitch.
They pricked him then with oer a hundred prongs,
and said: Here under cover must thou dance,
that, if thou canst, thou mayst thieve secretly.
Not otherwise do cooks have scullions plunge
the meat with hooks into the cauldrons midst,
to hinder it from floating on its surface.
Thereat my kindly Teacher said to me:
That here thy presence be not known, crouch down
behind a rock, which may avail to screen thee;
and be not thou afraid, for any harm
that may be done to me, who know these things,
for I in frays like this have been before.
He then passed on beyond the bridges head,
and when the sixth embankment had been reached,
he had to show assurance in his face.
With just the storm and fury wherewith dogs
break out and rush upon a poor old man,
who stops and begs at once from where he is;
from neath the little bridge those devils issued,
and turned against him all their grappling hooks;
but he cried out: Be none of you malicious!
Before your grappling hooks take hold of me,
let one of you advance, and hear me speak;
then take ye counsel as to grappling me.
[[237]]
Then all cried out: Let Malacoda go!
Thereat one started, while the rest kept still,
and, as he came, said: What does this avail him?
Dost thou think, Malacoda, said my Teacher,
that, as thou seest, I have hither come,
safe until now from all your hindrances,
unhelped by Will Divine and favoring fate?
Let us go on, for it is willed in Heaven
that I should show another this wild road.
Thereat his pride received so great a fall,
that at his feet he dropped his grappling hook,
and to the rest said: Let him not be wounded.
My Leader thereupon cried out to me:
Thou that among the bridges broken rocks
art crouching, safely now regain my side.
I therefore moved, and quickly came to him;
then all the fiends advanced so far, I feared
they would not keep their word. Even thus I once
saw infantry, who, under pledge of safety,
were from Caprona coming forth, afraid,
when mong so many foes they saw themselves.
Then wholly to my Leaders side I drew,
nor from their faces, which did not look good,
did I remove my eyes. For as their prongs
they lowered, one fiend to another said:
Wouldst thou that I should touch him on his rump?
and they replied: Yes, see thou nick it for him!
[[239]]
But that fiend, who was with my Leader talking,
turned round at once, and said to him: Keep still,
keep still there, Scarmiglion! Then to us:
Further advance along this present crag
can not be made, because the sixth arch yonder
lies wholly shattered on the ground below;
but if it please you still to go ahead,
go on along this ridge; there is near by
another crag which furnishes a path.
Than this hour five hours later yesterday,
twelve hundred, six and sixty years had passed,
since here the path was broken. I am sending
some of my company in that direction,
to see if any yonder air themselves;
go on with them, for they will not be bad.
Step forward, Alichino, and Calcabrina,
he then began to say, thou, too, Cagnazzo;
and let old Barbariccia guide the ten.
Have Libicocco go, and Draghignazzo;
tusked Ciriatto, too, and Graffiacane,
with Farfarello and crazy Rubicante.
Search round about the boiling birdlime pitch;
let these be safe as far as that next crag,
which all unbroken goes across the dens.
Oh, Teacher, what is this I see? said I.
If thou know how, pray let us go alone,
for I request no escort for myself.
[[241]]
If thou as wary art as thou art wont,
dost thou not notice how they gnash their teeth,
and with their eyebrows threaten us with woe?
And he to me: I would not have thee frightened;
let them grin on, then, as they like, for that
they re doing at the wretches who are boiled.
They wheeled, and moved along the left bank then;
but not till each, as signal toward their leader,
had first thrust out his tongue between his teeth,
and he had of his rump a trumpet made.
[[243]]
INFERNO XXII

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Fifth Trench. Corrupt Politicians

Ere now have I seen cavalry break camp,
start to attack, or be reviewed, and even,
at times, retreat, in order to escape;
scouts have I also seen upon your lands,
O Aretines; raids, too, have I beheld,
and tournaments and tilting-matches fought;
with trumpets now, and now with bells, with drums
and beacon-signals made from fortresses,
with native and with foreign things; but never
have I seen horse, or infantry, or ship,
by sign of either land or sky, set out
with instrument of wind as odd as that.
With the ten demons we were going on;
ah, the fierce company! But in a church
with saints consort, with gluttons at an inn!
Upon the pitch alone was I intent,
that I might see all details of the trench
and of the people who were burned therein.
As dolphins do, when, arching up their backs,
they give the warning which bids mariners
take measures for the safety of their ship;
[[245]]
even so at times, his suffering to relieve,
one of the sinners there displayed his back,
and hid it in less time than lightning takes.
And as in ditches at the waters edge
frogs stay with nothing but their muzzles out,
and thus conceal their feet and all the rest;
even so on all sides did those sinners stay;
and now that Barbariccia was approaching,
they likewise neath the boiling pitch withdrew.
I saw, and still it stirs my heart with horror,
one waiting thus, as oft, while one frog stays,
it happens that another scurries off.
And Graffiacane, who was nearest to him,
hooking his pitch-smeared tresses, pulled him up,
so that an otter he appeared to me.
I knew by now the names of each and all,
I noted them so well when they were chosen,
and, when they called each other, noticed how.
O Rubicante, see thou set thy claws
upon him so, that thou peel off his skin!
the accursd all cried out together then.
And I: My Teacher, if thou canst, contrive
to learn who that wretch is, who thus
has fallen into his adversaries hands.
My Leader thereupon drew near to him,
and asked him whence he was, and he replied:
Of Navarres kingdom I a native was.
[[247]]
My mother placed me out to serve a lord,
for she had borne me to a rascal knave,
who both himself and what he owned destroyed.
I next in good King Thibauts household served,
and there I set myself to practice graft,
for which I pay the reckoning in this heat.
Here Ciriatto, from whose mouth protruded,
as from a boars, a tusk on either side,
caused him to feel how one of them could rip.
Among bad cats the mouse had fallen now;
for Barbariccia clasped him in his arms,
and said: Stand off, while I am clutching him!
Then, toward my Teacher having turned his face,
he said: Ask him again, if more thou wish
to know of him, before the others rend him.
My Leader then: Now tell me: knowst thou any,
among the other sinners neath the pitch,
who Latin is? And he: Not long ago
I left a man from that vicinity;
would that like him I still were covered up,
for I should then fear neither claw nor hook!
Here Libicocco said: We ve borne too much!
and with his hook so seized him by the arm,
and tore it, that he carried off a piece.
And Draghignazzo also wished to clutch him
down at his legs; but their decurion then
turned right around at them with threatening looks.
[[249]]
When they were somewhat pacified again,
of him, who still was looking at his wound,
my Leader asked without delay: Who, then,
was he, from whom thou tookst unlucky leave,
as thou hast said, to land upon the shore?
And he made answer: That was Fra Gomita,
Galluras man, a vessel of all fraud,
who, when he held in hand his masters foes,
so dealt with them that each is glad. Their money
he took, and, as he puts it, let them all
off easy, and even in other offices
was not a petty, but a first rate grafter.
With him Don Michel Zanche of Logodoro
associates; and never do their tongues
feel tired out by talking of Sardinia.
But oh! Look at the other grinning there!
More would I say, but am afraid lest that one
be making ready now to claw my skin.
Then the great provost turned toward Farfarello,
who rolled his eyes as if he meant to strike,
and said: Off yonder, thou malicious bird!
If you desire thereat began again
the terror-stricken man, to see or hear
Tuscans or Lombards, I will have some come.
But let the Evil Claws here stand aside
a little, that their vengeance be not feared,
and I, while sitting in this very place,
[[251]]
for one that I am, shall make seven come out,
when I shall whistle, as our wont it is,
when any one of us protrudes himself.
Cagnazzo at this speech his muzzle raised,
and shook his head, and said: Hear the sly trick
devised by him to cast himself below!
Then he, who frauds in great abundance had,
replied to him: Tricky indeed am I,
when for my mates a greater pain I win!
Here Alichn could not control himself,
but said, in opposition to the rest:
I shall not gallop after thee, in case
thou dive, but oer the pitch shall beat my wings;
the ridge abandoned, be the bank a screen,
to see if thou alone art more than we!
Now, Reader, of a new sport shalt thou hear!
Each turned his eyes the other way; and he
the first, who had thereto been most opposed.
The Navarrese chose well his time, stood firmly
upon the ground, and, jumping suddenly,
from what they purposed freed himself thereby.
For this each felt himself to blame, but most
the one who of the loss had been the cause;
hence he moved first, and shouted: Thou art caught!
But little did it profit him; for wings
could not outmeasure fear; as one went under,
the other, flying upward, raised his breast;
[[253]]
nor different is the speed with which a duck
dives under water, when a hawk draws near,
who, vexed and baffled thus, flies up again.
Then Calcabrina, angered by the flout,
flew out behind him, glad that one escaped,
because it let him scuffle with the other;
and then, the grafter having disappeared,
he turned his claws upon his own companion,
and grappled with him oer the ditch; but he,
being, indeed, a fighting sparrow-hawk
fitted to claw him well, they both fell down
into the middle of the boiling fen.
A sudden separator was the heat;
but rising thence was quite impossible,
they had their wings so limed with sticky pitch.
Then Barbariccia, vexed as were the rest,
his mates, had four of them with all their hooks
fly to the other bank; on both sides then
they speedily descended to their posts,
and stretched their hooks out toward the pitch-belimed,
who now were cooked inside their crusted hides;
and, thus embarassed, we abandoned them.
[[255]]
INFERNO XXIII

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Sixth Trench. Hypocrites

Silent, alone, and unaccompanied,
we went along, one first and one behind,
as Minor Friars go when on the road.
My thoughts, by reason of the present brawl,
were turned to Aesops fable, that wherein
he talks about the frog and mouse; for now
and at this moment are no more alike,
than one is like the other, if beginning
and end be linked by an attentive mind.
And evn as one thought from another springs,
so, next, from that one was another born,
which doubled my first fear. Hence thus I thought:
These devils have been scorned on our account,
and with such injury and scoff, indeed,
that I believe that they are greatly vexed.
If anger to ill-will be joined, they ll come
more fiercely after us, than doth a dog
the rabbit which he seizes with his teeth.
Already was I feeling all my hair
bristling with fear, when, gazing back intent,
I said: If, Teacher, thou hide not thyself
[[257]]
and me with speed, I dread the Evilclaws;
we have them now behind us, and I so
imagine them, that I already feel them.
And he: If I were made of leaded glass,
thine outward image I would not reflect
more quickly than thine inward I receive.
Even now thy thoughts were coming among mine
with outlook and intent so similar,
that I with both a single purpose formed.
If it be true the right bank slopeth so,
that to the following trench we can descend,
we shall escape from this imagined chase.
He had not finished telling me his plan,
when not far off I saw them coming on
with wings outspread, intent on seizing us.
My Leader then took hold of me at once,
even as a mother, by the noise aroused,
and seeing close to her the burning flames,
seizes her child and flees, and doth not stop,
since caring more for him than for herself,
even long enough to clothe her with a shift;
and downward from the ridge of that hard bank,
his back he yielded to the hanging rock,
which closes one side of the following trench.
Water neer moved as swiftly through a sluice,
to turn the overshot wheel of a mill,
when closest to the paddles it approaches,
[[259]]
as did my Teacher oer that selvage-bank,
bearing me down with him upon his back,
as though his son I were, and not his mate.
His feet had hardly reached the trenchs bed
below, when they were on the ridge above,
just over us; but naught was now to fear;
because the Providence on high, which willed
to place them in the fifth trench as its servants,
takes from them all the power of leaving it.
A painted people found we there below,
who, moving with exceedingly slow steps,
shed tears, and in their looks appeared subdued
and weary. Cloaks they had equipped with cowls
lowered before their eyes, and cut like those
which in Cologne are fashioned for her monks.
So gilded outside are they that they dazzle;
but inside all are lead, and of such weight,
that those which Frederick clothed men with were straw.
O cloak that wearies through eternity!
We turned again, as ever, to the left,
along with them, intent on their sad plaint;
but, owing to the weight, that weary folk
came on so slowly, that new company
we had at every motion of our legs.
Hence to my Leader I: Contrive to find
some one whom we may know by deed or name,
and, while thus going, move thine eyes around.
[[261]]
And one, who heard my Tuscan speech, cried out
behind us: Stay your feet, O ye that run
so quickly through the gloomy air! From me,
perhaps, shalt thou receive what thou dost ask.
Thereat my Leader turned and said: Now wait;
and then proceed according to his pace.
I stopped, and two I saw, whose faces showed
great mental haste to be with me, and yet
their burden and the narrow path delayed them.
On coming up to us, they watched me long
with eyes askance, and uttered not a word;
then, toward each other turning, thus they spoke:
This one seems by the action of his throat
alive; but if they re dead, by what right, then,
go they uncovered by the heavy stole?
And then, addressing me, they said: O Tuscan,
who to the gathering of sad hypocrites
art come, scorn not to tell us who thou art.
And I to them: On Arnos lovely stream,
and in its famous town, both born and bred,
Im in the body I have always had.
But who are ye, adown whose cheeks there drips,
as I perceive, so great a woe, and what
the penalty which sparkles on you thus?
These orange cloaks, one answered, are of lead,
and of such thickness are they, that the weights
thus cause the scales that balance them to creak.
[[263]]
We Jovial Friars were, and Bolognese;
I, Cataln, and Loderingo he,
by name, and chosen by thy town together,
as one alone is usually called,
to keep its peace; and such we were, as still
in the Gardingos neighborhood appears.
O friars, I began, your evil deeds . . .
but said no more; because there struck mine eyes
one crucified by three stakes on the ground.
On seeing me, sighs through his beard he blew,
and writhed all over; then Fra Cataln,
informed thereby of what had happened, said:
The pinioned man thou gazest at, advised
the Pharisees that it expedient was
to torture one man for the peoples sake.
Stretched crosswise, as thou seest, on the road,
and naked, he is forced to be the first
to feel how much whoever passes weighs.
And in like fashion suffer in this ditch
his father-in-law, and others of the council
which proved a seed of evil for the Jews.
I then saw Virgil marvelling at him,
who in the figure of a cross was stretched
so basely in eternal banishment.
Then to the friar he addressed these words:
Be not displeased to tell us, an ye may,
if on the right there lie a crossing-place,
[[265]]
by means of which we two may issue hence,
without black Angels being forced to come
and extricate us from this trenchs bed.
Nearer than thou dost hope he then replied,
a crag there is, which at the great round wall
begins, and all the cruel trenches spans,
save that at this one it is broken down,
and spans it not; but ye can climb the ruins,
which from its base lie piled along the slope.
My Leader kept his head bowed down awhile;
then said: Wrongly did he report the thing,
who yonder grapples sinners with his hook!
The friar then: Among the many vices given
the Devil at Bologna, I once heard
that he a liar is, and sire of lies.
Thereat my Leader with great strides departed,
somewhat disturbed by anger in his looks;
then I the burdened left, and followed on
behind the footprints of belovd feet.
[[267]]
INFERNO XXIV

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Seventh Trench. Thieves

When in the youthful season of the year
the sun beneath Aquarius warms his locks,
while southward now the nights pursue their way;
and when the hoar-frost draws upon the ground
the counterfeit of her white sisters face,
though shortly lasts the temper of her pen;
the peasant, lacking provender, gets up,
looks out, and, seeing all the country white,
slaps himself on the thigh, returns in doors,
and walking to and fro, laments, poor wretch,
not knowing what to do; then later on
returning out again, recovers hope,
on seeing that the world has shortly changed
its face; and, taking down his shepherd-staff,
out to their feeding drives his tender sheep.
Even thus my Teacher filled me with dismay,
when I beheld such trouble in his face;
thus, too, the plaster quickly reached the wound;
for when we had attained the ruined bridge,
my Leader turned to me with that sweet look,
which at the Mountains foot I first perceived.
[[269]]
First having well surveyed the ruined arch,
after some counsel taken with himself,
his arms he opened, and took hold of me.
And like a man who ponders while he acts,
and always seems to look ahead; evn so,
while upward to the top of one great rock
he pushed me, he sought out another crag,
and said: Take hold of that one next, but first
see whether it be fit to bear thy weight.
No path was this for one who wore a cloak,
since scarcely could we two, though he was light,
and I was pushed, ascend from rock to rock.
And had the slope on that bank not been shorter,
than on the other, I know not of him,
but I would surely have been overcome;
but since the whole of Malebolg slopes
down to the opening of the lowest well,
such is the nature of each trenchs banks,
that one is high, and low the following one;
and yet we reached at length the ridge above,
from which the crags last rock projects.
My breath was so exhausted from my lungs,
when up at last, that I could go no further;
nay, on arriving I sat down at once.
Thus, henceforth, must thou rid thyself of sloth,
my Teacher said; for one attains not fame,
sitting on cushions, or neath canopies;
[[271]]
and he that lives without attaining it,
leaveth on earth such traces of himself,
as smoke doth in the air, or foam in water.
Therefore get up! Oercome thy troubled breath
with that soul-energy, which wins all fights,
unless it sink beneath its bodys weight!
A longer stairway must be climbed; t is not
enough that these stairs have been left; if, then,
thou understand me, let it profit thee.
I thereupon arose, and showed myself
better equipped with breath than I had felt,
and said: Go on, for I am strong and bold!
We took the pathway up along the crag,
which rocky was, narrow and hard to climb,
and steeper far than was the one before.
Not to seem weak, I talked as on I went;
this from the next trench caused a voice to come,
which was incapable of forming words.
Though I was on the summit of the arch
which crosses here, I know not what it said;
but moved to anger seemed the one who spoke.
Downward I looked, and yet my living eyes
could not attain the bottom for the dark;
hence, Teacher, try to reach the following ridge,
said I, and let us from the wall descend,
for as I hear, but do not understand,
so, looking down from hence, I make out nothing.
[[273]]
No other answer give I thee, he said,
save that of action; for a fair request
ought to be met by deeds without a word.
We climbed down from the bridges further head,
where to the eighth embankment it is joined,
and then the trench was clearly shown to me;
and in it I beheld a frightful throng
of snakes, and of so weird a kind, that still
the memory of them freezes up my blood.
Let Libya and her sand no longer boast;
for though she breed cheldri, jculi,
with cenchri, phreae and mphisbaenae,
neer with all Ethiopia did she show,
nor een with what above the Red Sea lies,
either so many or such evil plagues.
Among this cruel and most dismal swarm
people were running, nude and terrified,
and with no hope of hole or heliotrope.
Their hands were bound behind their back with snakes,
whose tail and head were thrust between their loins,
and tied together in a knot in front.
Then lo, a serpent hurled himself at one,
who near our bank was standing, and transfixed him
there where the neck is to the shoulders joined.
Never were o or i so quickly written,
as he took fire, and, burning up, must needs
turn wholly into ashes as he fell;
[[275]]
whereat, though thus destroyed upon the ground,
the dust, assembling of its own accord,
turned instantly into the self-same man.
So likewise, as great sages have declared,
the Phoenix dies, and then is born again,
as she approaches her five-hundredth year;
she feeds through life on neither herbs or grain,
but on ammum only and incense-tears;
her final swaddling bands are nard and myrrh.
And as is he who falls, nor knoweth how,
by demon force, which pulls him to the ground,
or other inhibition binding man,
and who, on getting up again, looks round
wholly bewildered by the great distress
which he has felt, and, as he looks, heaves sighs;
such was that sinner, after he had risen.
O Power of God, how truly just thou art,
that in revenge dost deal such blows as these!
Thereat my Leader asked him who he was,
and he replied: Into this wild ravine
I rained from Tuscany not long ago.
Mule that I was, a beasts life, not a mans,
I liked; I m Vanni Fucci, called the Beast;
for me Pistoia was a worthy den.
Then Tell him not to slip away, I said,
and ask what fault thrust him down here; for I
once saw in him a man of blood and strife.
[[277]]
The sinner then, who understood, feigned not,
but turned toward me both mind and face, and said,
as with a sudden shame he colored up:
That thou hast caught me in the misery
in which thou seest me, gives me greater pain
than that which took me from the other life.
I cant refuse what thou dost ask of me.
I m placed thus low, because t was I who robbed
the vestry known for its fair ornaments;
a deed once falsely put upon another.
But now, lest thou enjoy this sight of me,
if thou art ever out of these dark lands,
thine ears to my announcement ope, and hear:
Pistoia first despoils herself of Neri;
then Florence changes folk and government.
From Val di Magra Mars draws forth a bolt
by turbid clouds enveloped; next, with wild
and cruel storm, a battle will be fought
upon the Picene Plain; then suddenly
the bolt will cleave the mist in such a way,
that every Bianco will thereby be wounded.
And this I ve said, that it may give thee pain!
[[279]]
INFERNO XXV

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Seventh Trench. Thieves

The thief, at the conclusion of his words,
lifted his hands with both their figs, and cried:
Take that, O God, for t is to Thee I show them!
From that time onward snakes have been my friends,
for thereupon one coiled around his neck,
as if to say: I d have thee speak no more;
another, coiling, tied his arms together,
and clinched itself so well in front of him,
that he could make no use of them at all.
Pistoia, ah, Pistoia, why not will
to burn to ashes, and no longer last,
since in ill-doing thou excellst thy seed?
In all of Hells dark rings I ve seen no spirit
so arrogant toward God; not even he,
who fell down headlong from the walls at Thebes.
Without another word he fled away;
whereat I saw a Centaur full of rage
come crying: Where, where is the stubborn soul?
Not evn Maremma has so many snakes,
I think, as on his crupper that one had,
as far as where our human form begins.
[[281]]
Upon his shoulders right behind his nape
there crouched a dragon with wide opened wings;
and he sets fire to whomsoeer he meets.
My Teacher said: He, yonder, Cacus is,
who neath the rocks that form Mount Aventine
oft made a lake of blood. He travels not
along the road oer which his brethren go,
because of having fraudulently robbed
the famous herd which he as neighbor had;
this ended his sly deeds beneath the club
of Hercules, who may perhaps have dealt him
a hundred blows, whereof he felt but ten.
While thus he spoke, that sinner, too, made off;
whereat three spirits came and stood below us,
whom neither I nor even my Leader noticed,
until they all cried out: Who then are ye?
because of which our conversation ceased,
for afterward we heeded them alone.
I knew them not; but so it happened then,
as it is wont to do in certain cases,
that one perforce employed anothers name,
saying: But where can Cianfa have remained?
Hence, that my Leader might give heed, I placed
my finger in a line from chin to nose.
If thou art slow now, Reader, to believe
what I shall tell, no marvel will it be,
for I, who saw it, hardly grant I did.
[[283]]
As toward them I was holding up my brows,
lo, a six-footed serpent hurls itself
in front of one, and clings to him all over;
with both its middle feet it clasped his paunch,
and with its fore feet seized upon his arms;
then with its teeth it wounded both his cheeks;
it spread its hind feet out along his thighs,
and thrusting next its tail between the two,
it stretched it upward all along his back.
Ivy was never rooted to a tree
so fast, as round about the others limbs
that horrible wild creature twined its own.
And thereupon, as if hot wax they were,
they stuck together, and their colors mixed,
till neither seemed to be what it had been;
just as a browish hue precedes the flame
on burning paper which is not yet black,
while, equally, the white part dies away.
The other two looked on, and each exclaimed:
O me, Agnello, what a change is thine!
for see, thou now art neither two nor one.
Already into one had both heads turned,
when we two countenances still beheld
mixed in a single face, where both were lost.
From the four previous strips two arms were made;
the thighs and legs, the belly and the chest
became such members as were never seen.
[[285]]
Cancelled therein was every former aspect;
the transformed figure seemed both two and none;
and thus appearing slowly moved away.
As like a lightning-flash a lizard looks,
if, changing hedges neath the dog-days scourge,
across a road it passes; even such
a little fiery serpent seemed to me,
as toward the bellies of the other two
it came, livid and black as peppercorn.
And in that part through which our nourishment
is first received, it transfixed one of them,
and then fell down, stretched out in front of him.
The pierced man gazed at it, but nothing said;
nay, firmly on his feet he stood, and yawned,
as if attacked by fever or by sleep.
He at the serpent looked, and it at him;
one through his wound, the other through its mouth
smoked hard, and each smoke with the other mingled.
Let Lucan, then, be silent, where he tells
of poor Sabellus and Nassidius fate,
and, giving heed, hear what is now proclaimed.
Of Cadmus, and of Arethusa, too,
let Ovid cease to speak; for though his verse
turn him into a snake, and make of her
a fount, I grudge him not; for face to face
he neer so changed two natures, that the forms
of each were ready to exchange their matter.
[[287]]
They blended each with each in such a way
that, while the serpent fork-wise clove its tail,
the wounded man together drew his feet.
The legs and with them evn the very thighs
so stuck together, that in little time
their juncture left no mark that could be seen.
The cloven tail was taking on the shape
which there was being lost; the skin of one,
meanwhile, was growing soft, and hard the others.
I saw his arms withdraw into his armpits,
and both the serpents feet, which were not long,
lengthen as much, as those were growing short.
And then its hinder feet, together twisted,
became the member which a man conceals,
while from his own the wretch had two thrust forth.
And while the smoke was veiling both of them
with novel hues, and generated hair
on one side, and deprived of it the other,
the one stood up, and down the other fell,
nor turned aside for that the impious eyes,
beneath which each of them was changing face.
The one who stood, drew his in toward his temples;
and from the excessive matter coming there
ears issued on his undeveloped cheeks;
and that, which ran not back, but was retained,
of this superfluous matter, gave the face
a nose, and thickened suitably its lips.
[[289]]
He who was lying down thrusts forth his muzzle,
and backward through his head withdraws his ears,
even as a snail doth with its horns; his tongue,
which single used to be, and prompt to speech,
divides itself, while in the other case,
the split one closes, and the smoking stops.
The soul which had become a savage beast
flees hissing through the trench; the other spits
behind him as he talks. Then, having turned
away from him his just created shoulders,
he to the third said: I d have Buoso run,
as I have, on his belly oer this path.
I thus beheld the seventh balast change
and interchange; here let its novelty
excuse me, if it slightly blur my pen.
And though somewhat bewildered were my eyes,
and though confused my mind, those men could not
escape so secretly, that I should fail
Pccio Sciancato perfectly to see;
and of the three companions who came first,
he only was not changed; the other one
was he, for whom, Gavill, thou dost weep.
[[291]]
INFERNO XXVI

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Eighth Trench. Fraudulent Counselors

Rejoice, O Florence, since thou art so great,
that thou dost beat thy wings oer sea and land,
while evn through Hell thy name is spread abroad!
Among the thieves five such as these I found,
thy citizens, whence shame accrues to me,
nor to great honor risest thou thereby.
But if the truth be dreamed at dawns approach,
thou lt feel a little while from now what Prato,
of others not to speak, is craving for thee;
and were it now, it would not be too soon;
so were it, then, since thus it needs must be!
for it will grieve me more, the more I age.
We went away, and up the flight of stairs,
the bournes had formed for our descent before,
my Teacher climbed again, and drew me with him;
and as we followed up the lonely path
among the rocks and boulders of the crag,
our feet proceeded not without our hands.
I sorrowed then, and now again I sorrow,
when I direct my mind to what I saw,
and curb my genius more than I am wont,
[[293]]
lest it should run when virtue guides it not;
that, if a kindly star, or aught thats better,
have blest me, I myself may not regret it.
As many glow-worms as the countryman, 
who on the hillside takes his rest, when he,
who lights the world, least hides his face from us,
while to the gnat the fly is giving way, 
sees down along the valley where, perchance,
he gathers in his grapes, or ploughs his field;
with just as many flames the whole eighth trench
was gleaming bright, as I perceived at once,
when I was where its bottom came in view.
As he who by the bears avenged himself,
beheld Elijahs chariot when it left,
and when to heaven its horses rose erect,
since he could not so trace it with his eyes,
as to see more than just the flame alone,
when like a little cloud it rose on high;
of such a nature were the flames that moved
along the gulley of the ditch, for none
displays its theft, though each a sinner hides.
Risen up to look, I so stood on the bridge,
that without being pushed I would have fallen,
had I not grasped a great projecting rock.
My Leader, who perceived me thus intent,
then said: The spirits are within the fires,
and each is swathed by that wherewith he burns.
[[295]]
My Teacher, I replied, I m more assured
through hearing thee, but deemed it so already,
and wished to ask thee: Who is in the flame
which comes along so cloven at the top,
that from the pyre it seems to rise, whereon
Etocles was with his brother placed?
He answered me: Therein are both Ulysses
and Diomed tormented, who in pain
thus go together, as they did in wrath;
and in that flame of theirs they now bewail
the ambush of the horse, which made the gate,
from which the Romans noble seed went forth;
there they lament the trick, because of which
Deidama, dead, still mourns Achilles;
there the Palladiums penalty is paid.
If they can speak within those sparks, said I,
I pray thee, Teacher, much, and pray again
that mine be worth to thee a thousand prayers,
refuse not my request to linger here
until the horned flame come this way; thou seest
that toward it I m inclined by great desire.
And he replied to me: Thy prayer deserves
much praise and therefore I accede to it,
but see thou that thy tongue restrain itself.
Leave speech to me, who have a clear idea
of what thou wouldst; for they, since Greeks they were,
might be, perchance, disdainful of thy words.
[[297]]
After the flame had come so near to us,
that time and place seemed fitting to my Leader,
t was in this fashion that I heard him speak:
O ye that in a single flame are two,
if I deserved of you, when still alive,
if I deserved of you or much or little,
when in the world I wrote the lofty verses,
depart not; but let one of you inform us
whither, when lost, he went away to die.
The greater horn then of the ancient flame
began to quiver with a murmuring sound,
as would a flame made weary by the wind;
and then, while swaying here and there its tip,
as if the latter were the tongue that spoke,
gave forth a voice, and said: When I departed
from Circe, who concealed me near Gaeta
more than a year before Aeneas so
had named the place, nor fondness for my son,
nor pious reverence for my agd father,
nor evn the bounden love which should have cheered
Penelope, could overcome within me
the eagerness I had to gain experience
both of the world, and of the vice and worth
of men; but forth I put upon the deep
and open sea with but a single ship,
and with that little company, by whom
I had not been deserted. Both its shores
[[299]]
I then beheld, as far away as Spain,
Morocco and the island of the Sards,
and all the rest that sea bathes round about.
Both old and slow were I and my companions,
when we attained that narrow passage-way,
where Hercules set up those signs of his,
which warned men not to sail beyond their bounds;
Seville I left behind me on the right hand,
Ceuta Id left already on the other.
And then I said: O brothers, ye who now
have through a hundred thousand perils reached
the West, to this so short a waking-time
still left your senses, will not to refuse
experience of that world behind the sun
which knows not man! Bethink you of the seed
whence ye have sprung; for ye were not created
to lead the life of stupid animals,
but manliness and knowledge to pursue.
So eager for the voyage did I make
my fellows by this little speech of mine,
that, after it, I hardly could have checked them.
Hence, to the morning having turned our stern,
we with our oars made wings for our mad flight,
eer veering toward the left as on we sped.
Night was already seeing all the stars
of the other pole, and our pole so low down,
that from the oceans floor it never rose.
[[301]]
Five times rekindled, and as often quenched,
had been the light beneath the moon, since first
we entered on the passage of the deep,
when lo, a mountain loomed before us, dim
by reason of the distance, and so high
it seemed to me, that I had seen none such.
And we rejoiced; but soon our happiness
was turned to grief; for from the new-found land
a whirlwind rose, and smote our vessels prow;
three times it made her whirl with all the waters;
then at the fourth it made her stern go up,
and prow go down, even as Another pleased,
till over us the oceans waves had closed.
[[303]]
INFERNO XXVII

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Eighth Trench. Fraudulent Counselors

The flame, because of having ceased to speak,
was quiet and erect, and now away from us
was going with the gentle Poets leave;
when lo, another, which behind it came,
caused us to turn our eyes up toward its tip,
by reason of a vague sound issuing thence.
As the Sicilian bull (which bellowed first
with the lament of him, and that was right,
who with his file had given form to it,)
was wont to bellow with the voice of him
who suffered in it, so that, though of brass,
it seemed the one who by the pain was pierced;
even so, since from the body of the flame
they had nor path nor mouth, the painful words
were changed at first into the latters tongue.
But when these words had travelled to the tip,
and given it that vibration which the tongue,
when uttered, gave to them, we heard it say:
O thou, to whom I now address my voice,
and who just now didst talk in Lombard, saying:
Now go thy way, for thee I urge no more;
[[305]]
though I, perhaps, have somewhat late arrived,
be not displeased to stop and speak with me;
thou seest that I am not, although I burn!
If into this blind world thou only now
art fallen down from that sweet Latin land,
whence all my guilt I bring, pray tell me whether
the Romagnoles are having peace or war;
for I came from the mountains tween Urbino
and that high peak from which the Tiber springs.
While downward I was leaning still intent,
my Leader touched me on my side, and said:
Speak thou, for this one an Italian is.
And I, who had my answer all prepared,
began to speak without delay: O soul,
that art concealed down yonder, thy Romagna
is not at present, and she never was,
devoid of war within her tyrants hearts;
but I left none apparent there just now.
Ravenna is, as she for many years
has been; Polentas eagle so broods there,
that Cervia it oercovers with its wings.
The town which made the long resistance once,
and of the French a sanguinary heap,
beneath the green paws finds itself again.
Verrucchios former Mastif and the new,
who foully with Montagna dealt, there make,
where they are wont, a gimlet of their teeth.
[[307]]
The cities of Lamone and Santerno
the little lion of the white lair rules,
who changes sides from summer-time to winter;
and that whose flank is by the Savio bathed,
lives, as it sits twixt plain and mount,
a free state half, and half a tyranny.
And now, I pray thee, tell me who thou art,
nor harder be than others here have been,
so may thy name maintain itself on earth.
After the flame had roared a little while,
as is its fashion, to and fro it moved
its pointed tip, and then gave forth this breath:
If I believed that my reply were made
to one who to the world would eer return,
this flame would stay without another quiver;
but inasmuch as, if I hear the truth,
none eer returned alive from this abyss,
fearless of infamy I answer thee.
A man of arms I was, then Cordelier,
trusting, since girded thus, to make amends;
and certainly my trust had been confirmed,
were t not for that High Priest, (whom ill befall!)
who set me at my former sins again;
both how and why I d have thee hear from me.
While I was still the shape of bones and flesh
my mother gave me, my performances
were not a lions, but a foxs deeds.
[[309]]
All covert practices and hidden ways
I knew; and I so carried on their arts,
that to the ends of earth their fame was noised.
When I perceived at last that I had reached
that period of my life, when each should strike
his sails and coil his ropes, what hitherto
had given me pleasure I thereat disliked;
I yielded then, repenting and confessing,
and that, alas, poor me! would have availed.
The Prince of modern Pharisees, who then
hard by the Lateran had a war on hand,
though not with either Saracens or Jews,
for Christian were all enemies of his,
and none of them had gone to conquer Acre,
or been a merchant in the Soldans land;
not heeding in himself his lofty office
and holy orders, or in me the cord,
which leaner used to make those girt therewith;
but as upon Soracte Constantine
once bade Sylvester heal his leprosy;
so this one called on me, as master-leech,
to cure him of the fever of his pride;
he asked me for advice, but I kept still,
because his words were like a drunkards words.
And then he said: Let not thy heart mistrust;
I from now on absolve thee; teach me, then,
how I can Palestrina overthrow.
[[311]]
To lock and unlock Heaven is in my power,
as thou dost know; two, therefore, are the Keys,
my predecessor held in small esteem.
His weighty words then drove me to the point,
at which the silent course appeared the worse;
Father, I therefore said, since from the sin
thou washest me, which I must now commit,
a promise long drawn out but shortly kept
will cause thy triumph on the lofty seat.
Then Francis came for me, when I was dead;
but one of our black Cherubs said to him:
Remove him not, and do no wrong to me!
Among my menials he must needs descend,
because he gave the fraudulent advice,
since which till now I ve had him by the hair;
for who repents not cannot be absolved,
nor yet can one at once repent and will,
the contradiction not permitting it!
O woeful me! O how I shook with fear,
when, after laying hold on me, he said:
Perhaps thou didst not think me a logician!
He carried me to Minos, and the latter
round his hard back eight times entwined his tail,
and when in great rage he had bitten it,
A sinner of the thievish fire is this,
he said; hence, where thou seest me, I am lost,
and, thus robed, sorrowing go my way.
[[313]]
When he had thus completed his discourse,
the flame departed from us with its grief,
twisting and lashing its sharp-pointed horn.
I and my Leader then passed further on
up oer the crag, as far as the next arch
which spans the ditch, wherein their due is paid
to those who burdens win by severing bonds.
[[315]]
INFERNO XXVIII

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Ninth Trench. Sowers of Discord

Who ever could, evn with unfettered words,
tell fully of the blood and of the wounds
which now I saw, though oft he told the tale?
All tongues would certainly fall short of it,
by reason of our speech and of our mind,
whose means are small for taking in so much.
If all the people should again assemble,
who on Apulias fortune-ravaged soil
suffered of old from all the loss of blood
shed by the Trojans, and in that long war,
which with its spoil of rings made such high heaps,
as Livy writes, who maketh no mistakes;
with those who felt the painful force of blows
received in waging war with Robert Guiscard,
and those whose bones are still heaped up together
at Ceperano, where a faithless liar
was each Apulian, and near Tagliacozzo,
where old Alardo won, though all unarmed;
and if, of these, one showed a limb pierced through,
and one a limb lopped off, t would all be nothing,
compared with this ninth trenchs foul display.
[[317]]
No cask, indeed, by loss of middle-board
or stave, is opened as was one I saw,
split from the chin to where one breaketh wind;
while down between his legs his entrails hung,
his pluck appeared, and that disgusting sack,
which maketh excrement of what is swallowed.
While I on seeing him was all intent,
he looked at me, and opening with his hands
his breast, he said: See now how I am cloven!
Behold how torn apart Mahomet is!
Ali in tears moves on ahead of me,
cloven in his face from forelock down to chin;
and all the others whom thou seest here
disseminators were, when still alive,
of strife and schism, and hence are cloven thus.
There is a devil here behind, who thus
fiercely adorns, and to the swords edge puts
each member of this company anew,
when we have gone around the woeful road;
because, ere one return in front of him,
the wounds thus made have all been closed again.
But who art thou, that musest on the crag,
perhaps to put off going to the torture
adjudged thine accusation of thyself?
Death hath not reached him yet, replied my Teacher,
nor to a torment is he led by guilt,
but that complete experience may be givn him,
[[319]]
I, who am dead, must needs conduct him here
from circle unto circle down through Hell;
and this is true, as that I speak to thee.
On hearing him, more were there than a hundred
who stopped there in the ditch to look at me,
and who through their surprise forgot their pain.
To Fra Dolcino do thou therefore say,
thou that, perhaps, wilt shortly see the sun,
if soon he would not hither follow me,
to arm him so with food, lest stress of snow
should give the Novarese a victory,
which else would not be easily obtained.
When one foot he had raised to go away,
Mahomet said these words to me; which done,
upon the ground he stretched it to depart.
Another then, who had his neck pierced through,
his nose cut off as far as neath his brows,
and who had one ear only, having stopped
to gaze in wonder with the others there,
opened, before the rest, his throat, whose neck
vermilion was on every side, and said:
O thou that by thy guilt art not condemned,
and whom up in the Latin land I ve seen,
unless too great resemblance play me false,
call Pier da Medicina to thy mind,
if eer thou see again the lovely plain,
which from Vercelli slopes to Marcab.
[[321]]
And make it known to Fanos two best men,
to Messer Guido and Angiolello, too,
that they, unless foreseeing be in vain
down here, will from their vessel be cast forth,
and drowned in sacks near La Cattlica,
through a disloyal tyrants treachery.
Between the isles Majolica and Cyprus
Neptune neer saw so great a crime committed
by pirates, nay, nor by the Argolic folk.
That traitor who sees only with one eye,
and holds the town, from seeing which, one now
is with me here, who fain would fasting be,
will to a conference have them come with him;
he ll then so act, that gainst Focaras wind
they ll stand in need of neither vow nor prayer.
And I to him: Point out and show to me,
if news of thee thou dst have me bear above,
which is the one who had the bitter sight.
Thereat he laid his hand upon the jaw
of one of his companions, oped his mouth,
and cried: This is the one, for he speaks not;
when exiled, he removed all doubt in Caesar,
by saying that a man, when once prepared,
neer brooked delay but to his detriment.
Oh, how dismayed that Curio seemed to me,
who from his throat now had his tongue cut out,
yet once had been so daring in his speech!
[[323]]
Then one, from whom both hands had been lopped off,
raising his maimed arms through the gloomy air,
so that his blood befouled his face, cried out:
Mosca will thou remember, too, who said,
alas! What s done is done! a speech which proved
the seed of evil for the Tuscan race.
And death I thereto added, to thy tribe!
Then he, as woe on woe he heaped, went off,
as one would whom his grief had made insane.
But I remained to look upon the throng,
and such a thing I saw as I should be
afraid to tell of without further proof;
if it were not that conscience reassures me,
the good companion which, beneath the breastplate
of conscious purity, emboldens man.
I really saw, and still I seem to see it,
a trunk without a head, which moved along,
as moved the others of the mournful herd;
and by the hair it held the severed head,
which, hanging like a lantern from its hand,
was saying as it gazed at us: O me!
With his own self he made himself a lamp,
and two in one they were, and one in two;
how this can be, He knows who so ordains.
When at the bridges very foot he was,
he raised his arm above him, head and all,
that he might thus bring near to us his words,
[[325]]
which were: Now see my baneful punishment,
thou that, though breathing, gost to see the dead!
See whether any be as great as this!
And that thou with thee mayst bear news of me,
know that Bertran de Born I am, the man
who gave the youthful king the ill support.
Of sire and son I mutual rebels made;
Ahithophel by Absalom and David,
with his malicious goadings, did no more.
Because I severed those who thus were joined,
I bear my brain around with me, alas!
severed from its foundation in this trunk;
retaliation thus is seen in me.
[[327]]
INFERNO XXIX

The Eighth Circle. Fraud

The Tenth Trench. Falsifiers of Metals

The many people and unheard-of wounds
had caused my eyes to be so drunk with tears,
that fain they were to linger there and weep;
but Virgil said: At what art gazing still?
Why is it that thine eyes still rest down there
among the wretched mutilated shades?
Thou didst not thus when in the other trenches;
consider, then, if thou propose to count them,
that this trench circles two-and-twenty miles,
and that the moon is now beneath our feet;
short is the time allowed us still, and more
there is to see, than what thou seest here.
If thou hadst heeded I thereat replied,
the reason for my gazing there, thou wouldst,
perhaps, have granted me a longer stay.
Meantime my Leader on his way was going,
and I behind him moving, as I made
my answer, adding: In that hollow place,
whereon I kept mine eyes so steadily,
I think a spirit sprung from mine own blood
bewails the fault so dearly paid for there.
[[329]]
Thereat my Teacher said: Let not thy thoughts
hereafter break on him; heed other things,
and there let him remain; for at the foot
of that small bridge I saw him point thee out,
and with his finger fiercely threaten thee;
Geri del Bello I then heard him called.
So wholly wast thou then intent on him
who formerly possessed Hautefort, that thou,
till he departed, didst not look beyond.
Leader, said I, his death by violence,
which is not yet avenged for him by any
who shared the shame, made him indignant; that,
as I believe, was why he went away
without addressing me; he thus has caused me
to pity him the more. We thus conversed
till we had reached the first place on the crag,
whence, had there been more light, the next ravine
had to its very bottom been revealed.
When we oer Malebolgs final cloister
were situated so, that its lay-brethren
could be perceived by us, uncouth laments,
which had their arrow-heads with pity barbed,
so pierced me through and through, that with my hands
I closed mine ears. Such pain as there would be,
if from the hospitals of Val di Chiana,
Maremma and Sardinia, from July
until September, all diseases came
[[331]]
together in one ditch; such was it here;
and out of it there came a stench, like that
which out of rotting limbs is wont to come.
Adown the last bank of the lengthy crag
we went, as ever to the left; and then
much clearer was my vision toward the bottom,
wherein the servant of the Most High Lord,
Justice infallible, is punishing
the falsifiers she recordeth here.
I do not think it were a sadder sight
to see the whole race in Aegina sick,
when so suffused with poison was the air,
that all the animals, down to the little worm,
fell dead, and when the ancient race of people,
according to what poets hold for truth,
out of the seed of ants restored themselves;
than now it was, to see the spirits languish
down in that gloomy ditch in different heaps.
One on his belly lay, and others leaned
against each others shoulders, while another
crawled on all fours along the dismal path.
Without conversing, step by step we moved,
both looking at and listening to the sick,
who could not raise their bodies. Two of these
I then saw sitting and against each other
leaning, just as a pan against a pan
is leaned to warm, and spotted oer with scabs
[[333]]
from head to foot; and never have I seen
a curry-comb plied by a boy, for whom
his master waited, or by one who kept
awake against his will, as each oft plied
upon himself the edge of finger-nails
for the great rage of itching, which hath else
no help; their nails kept scraping down their scabs,
as doth a knife the scales of bream, or fish
of other kinds equipped with larger scales.
O thou that with thy fingers flayst thyself,
to one of them my Leader then began,
and who at times dost pincers make of them,
pray tell us whether Latin any be
of those in here, so may thy nails
suffice thee for thy work eternally.
We, both of us, whom thou beholdest here
so spoiled, are Latin, answered one who wept,
but who art thou that didst inquire of us?
My Leader thereupon said: I am one
who with this living man from ledge to ledge
descend, and who propose to show him Hell.
Thereat the common back was broken up,
and trembling each of them turned round toward me,
with others who had heard him by rebound.
Then my good Teacher drew close up to me,
and said: Say whatsoeer thou wilt to them.
Hence, since he so had wished it, I began:
[[335]]
So may your memory never fly away
from human minds in that first world of ours,
but rather under many suns survive,
pray tell me who ye are, and of what people;
nor let your foul and loathsome punishment
make you afraid to show yourselves to me.
I of Arezzo was; and Albero
da Siena had me burned; one then replied,
but what I died for doth not bring me here.
T is true I said to him, although in jest,
that I knew how to raise me in the air;
and he, who, curious, had but little sense,
wished me to show that art to him; and only
because I did not make him Daedalus,
he had me burned by one, who treated him
as son. But to the last trench of the ten
Minos, who may not make mistakes, condemned me
for the alchemy I practised in the world.
Then to the Poet I: Now was there ever
a people as vainglorious as the men
of Siena? Surely not the French by far!
Whereat the other leprous one, who heard me,
replied to what I said: Excepting Stricca,
who moderation knew in what he spent;
and Niccol, who was the first to find
the costly use of cloves in gardens where
such seed takes root; excepting, too,
[[337]]
the company, on whom Cccia d Ascin
wasted his vineyard and great forest land,
while d Abbagliato squandered all his sense.
But so that thou mayst know who backs thee thus
against the men of Siena, point thine eyes
toward me, that well my face may answer thee;
so shalt thou see that I m Capocchios shade,
who metals falsified by alchemy;
and thou, if well I see thee, shouldst recall
how good an ape of nature I was once.
[[339]]
INFERNO XXX

The Eighth Circle. Fraud. The Tenth Trench

Falsifiers of Persons, Money, and Words

When Juno, on account of Semele,
was angry with the royal blood of Thebes,
as several times she showed herself to be,
so fiercely mad did Athamas become,
that, when he saw his wife approaching him,
burdened by her two sons on either side,
Spread we the nets, he cried, that I may take,
upon their passing, lioness and cubs!
and thereupon stretched out his cruel claws,
and taking hold of one, Learchus named,
whirled him around, and dashed him gainst a rock;
his wife then with the other drowned herself.
Again, when Fortune so low down had brought
the Trojans arrogant, all-daring power,
that with their kingdom shattered was their king;
Hecuba, sad, forlorn, and captive now,
when she had seen her dead Polxena,
and in her painful anguish had perceived
her Polydorus lying on the beach,
out of her senses, barked as would a dog;
so greatly had her suffering turned her mind.
[[341]]
But neer did furies or of Thebes or Troy
reveal in any one such cruelty,
in goading beasts or, much less, human limbs,
as that which I beheld in two death-pale
and naked shades, who ran around, and bit,
as doth a boar, when from the sty let out.
One reached Capocchio, and so thrust his tusks
into his neck behind, that, dragging him,
he made his belly scrape the solid ground.
The Aretine, still trembling, said to me:
That imp is Gianni Schicchi who, enraged,
goes all around ill-treating others thus.
Then Oh, said I to him, so may the other
not fix his teeth in thee, be not too tired
to tell me who he is, before he skips!
And he to me: That is the ancient soul
of wicked Myrrha, who, outside the bounds
of lawful love, became her fathers mistress.
She came to sin with him by counterfeiting
anothers person in herself, as dared
the other one who yonder goes away, 
that he might gain the lady of the stud, 
to counterfeit Buoso Donatis self,
and make his will and give it legal form.
When the two furious souls, on whom my eyes
were fixed, had passed away, I turned them round
to look upon the other evil born.
[[343]]
And one I saw, who like a lute were shaped,
if he had only had his groin cut off
down in the region where a man is forked.
The heavy dropsy which unmates the limbs
in such a way with ill-digested humor,
that face and paunch no longer correspond,
was causing him to keep his lips apart,
as doth the hectic, who, because of thirst,
turns one lip chinward, and the other up.
O ye that are, and wherefore I know not,
free from all torment in this world of woe,
said he to us, behold, and pay attention
to Master Adams wretched misery!
When living, I had all that I desired,
and now, alas, I crave a drop of water.
The little brooks which toward the Arno run
down from the Casentinos green-clad hills,
and render all their channels cool and fresh,
are evermore before me, nor in vain;
because their image makes me drier far
than this disease, which strips my face of flesh.
The rigid Justice, which is scourging me,
takes from the very place in which I sinned
the means to give my sighs a greater flight.
There lies Romena, where I falsified
the coin on which the Baptists form is stamped;
for that I left my body burned above.
[[345]]
But could I see the woeful soul of Guido,
or Alexander, or their brother, here,
for Fonte Branda I d not give the sight.
One is in here already, if the shades,
who go around here raging, tell the truth,
but what is that to me whose limbs are bound?
If only I were still so light of foot,
that I could in a hundred years advance
one inch, I d be already on the road,
in search of him among the loathsome people,
although this trench goes round eleven miles,
and is no less than half a mile across.
Through them am I in such a family,
for they persuaded me to coin the florins,
which had at least three carats of alloy.
Then I to him said: Who are those two wretches
who, smoking like wet hands in winter-time,
are lying there beside thee on thy right?
I found them here, he answered, when I rained
into this ditch, since when they have not turned,
nor will, I think, for all eternity.
One is the woman who charged Joseph falsely;
the other, Sinon, Troys deceitful Greek;
their burning fever makes them reek like this.
And one of them, who felt aggrieved, perhaps,
at being named so darkly, smote the speaker
upon his hard stiff belly with his fist.
[[347]]
It made a sound, as it had been a drum;
then Master Adam smote him with his arm,
which did not seem less hard, upon his face,
and said: Though I of motion be deprived,
by reason of my limbs which heavy are,
I have an arm that s loose for needs like this.
Then he replied: When going to the fire
thou hadst it not so ready; but just so,
and more, thou hadst it, when thou madest coin.
He of the dropsy: Here thou sayest true,
but thou wast not so true a witness there,
where thou wast questioned of the truth at Troy.
If I spoke falsely, thou didst falsify
the coin! said Sinon, I m for one sin here,
and thou for more than any other demon!
Remember, perjurer, the horse, replied
he of the swollen paunch, and bitter be
for thee, that known it is by all the world!
Ill be for thee the thirst wherewith thy tongue
is cracking, said the Greek, and that foul water,
which fore thine eyes thus makes thy paunch a hedge!
Thereat the coiner said: As is its wont,
thy mouth in speaking evil gapeth wide;
for though I m thirsty, and humor stuffs me out,
thine is the fever and the aching head;
and thou dst not stand in need of many words
bidding thee lick the mirror of Narcissus.
[[349]]
On listening to them I was all intent,
when Now be careful there! my Teacher said,
for I m not far from quarrelling with thee.
When I thus heard him speak to me in anger,
such was the shame wherewith I turned to him,
that through my memory it is circling still;
and such as he who dreameth of his harm,
and, dreaming, wishes that he dreamt, and thus,
as if it were not, longs for that which is;
such I became, who, impotent to speak,
would fain excuse myself, and all the while
was doing so, but did not think I was.
Less shame would wash away a greater fault
than thine hath been; my Teacher said to me,
therefore unburden thee of all thy sadness,
and count on me as ever at thy side,
if it again should chance that Fortune find thee
where folk in such a wrangle are engaged;
for vulgar is the wish to hear such things.
[[351]]
INFERNO XXXI

The Edge of the Central Well

The Giants

One and the selfsame tongue first wounded me,
so that it colored both my cheeks, and then
supplied me with the medicine required;
Achilles and his fathers lance, I hear,
was likewise wont to be the source of, first,
a sad, and, after, of a grateful gift.
We turned our backs upon the woeful vale
over the bank which girds it round about,
and passed across without a single word.
Here less than night it was, and less than day,
so that my sight advanced not far; but here
I heard a horn give forth so loud a sound,
that it had rendered any thunder faint;
this led mine eyes, as counter to its path
they followed, wholly to a single place.
After the woeful rout, when Charlemagne
the holy army of his knights had lost,
Roland blew not so terrible a blast.
I had not kept my head turned toward it long,
when many lofty towers I seemed to see;
I, therefore: Teacher, say what town is this?
[[353]]
Since through the darkness from too far away
thou peerest, he replied, it comes about
that afterward thou errest in conceiving.
If yonder thou attain, thou lt clearly see
how from afar ones senses are deceived;
hence onward urge thyself a little more.
Thereat he took my hand with kindly care,
and said to me: Ere further on we go,
so that the fact may seem less strange to thee,
know, then, that towers they are not, but Giants;
and all of them are standing in the well
around the bank, each from his navel down.
As, when a fog is thinning off, ones gaze
little by little giveth shape to that,
which, since it packs the air, the mist conceals;
even so, as through the dense, dark air I pierced,
and nearer drew and nearer to the brink,
error in me took flight, and fear increased;
for, as upon its round enclosing walls
Montereggione crowns itself with towers;
thus oer the margin which surrounds the well
with one half of their bodies towered up
those frightful Giants, whom, when from the sky
he thunders, Jupiter is threatening still.
Already now was I distinguishing
the face of one, his shoulders and his breast,
most of his paunch, and, down his sides, both arms.
[[355]]
When Nature ceased from making animals
like these, and took such executioners
from Mars, she certainly did very well;
and evn if she of elephants and whales
repent her not, whoever subtly looks
holds her therein the more discreet and just;
for where the reasoning faculty is joined
to evil will equipped with power to act,
people can make against it no defence.
His face appeared to me as long and big
as is at Rome the pine-cone of Saint Peters,
and in proportion to it were his other bones;
so that the bank, which from his middle down
an apron was, showed quite so much of him
above it, that of reaching to his hair
three Frisians would have made a useless boast;
for I full thirty spans of him perceived,
down from the place at which one buckles cloaks.
Rafel mai amech zabi et almi
the frightful mouth, to which no sweeter psalms
were fitting, thereupon began to cry.
Then toward him cried my Leader: Foolish soul,
keep to thy horn, and vent thyself therewith,
when wrath or other passion seizes thee!
Search at thy neck, and thou wilt find the cord
which holds it tied, O spirit of confusion,
and see it lying on thy mighty breast.
[[357]]
To me then: Self-accused he stands, for this
is Nimrod, to whose evil thought is due
that more than one tongue in the world is spoken.
Let us leave him alone, nor talk in vain;
for such is every tongue to him, as his
to others is, for that is known to none.
Then, turning to the left, we travelled on
much further; and within a crossbows shot
we found the next one far more large and fierce.
What was the masters power who girded him,
I cannot say; but this one had in front
his left arm, and behind his back his right,
tied by a chain, which downward from his neck
held him so bound, that on the uncovered part
it wound around as far as the fifth coil.
My Leader said to me: Gainst Jove Most High
this proud soul wished to test his strength, and hence
hath this reward. Ephialtes is his name;
his haughty undertaking he attempted
what time the Giants caused the Gods to fear;
the arms he plied he moveth now no more.
And I to him: If possible it be,
I d gladly have these eyes of mine enjoy
experience of the measureless Briareus.
Then he replied: Antaeus thou lt behold
not far from here, who speaks, and, since unbound,
can set us at the bottom of all sin.
[[359]]
He is much further on, whom thou wouldst see,
and bound he is, and shaped like this one, save
that more ferocious in his looks he seems.
There never was an earthquake strong enough
to shake a tower with so much violence,
as Ephialtes quickly shook at this.
Then more than ever yet did I fear death,
nor for it was there need of more than fear,
had it not been that I perceived his bonds.
We thereupon proceeded further still,
and to Antaeus came, who full five ells,
beside his head, protruded from the pit.
O thou that in the valley fortune-blest,
which once caused Scipio to inherit glory
when with his followers Hannibal took flight,
once tookst a thousand lions as thy prey,
and who, hadst thou been at thy brethrens war
on high, it seems that it is still believed
the Sons of Earth had been the victors there;
pray set us down below, nor let disdain
affect thee, where the cold locks up Cocytus.
Make us not go to Ttyus or to Tpheus;
this man can give what most is longed for here;
stoop, then, nor twist thy muzzle. He can still
give fame to thee on earth, since he is living,
and still looks forward to long life, if Grace
recall him not untimely to itself.
[[361]]
The Teacher thus; then he in haste stretched out
the hands, whose mighty pressure Hercules
once felt, and took my Leader. Virgil then,
on feeling himself taken, said to me:
Come here, that I may take thee up; and then
so did, that he and I one bundle were.
Such as the Carisenda seems, when viewed
beneath its leaning side, wheneer a cloud
sails oer it so, that opposite it hangs;
such did Antaeus seem to me, who watched
to see him stoop, and such a moment t was,
that I had gladly gone another road.
But lightly at the bottom, which devours
Judas and Lucifer, he set us down;
nor, thus bent over, did he linger there,
but raised himself, as on a ship a mast.
[[363]]
INFERNO XXXII

The Ninth Circle. Treachery. Cocytus

Traitors to their Relatives, and to their Country

If I had rhymes that were as harsh and hoarse
as would be fitting for the dismal hole,
on which lean all the other circling rocks,
I d squeeze the juice of my conception out
more fully; but because I have them not,
not without fear do I resolve to speak;
for to describe the bottom of the universe
is not an enterprise wherewith to jest,
nor for a tongue that says mamma and dad;
let, then, those Ladies give my verse their aid,
who helped Amphion build the walls of Thebes,
that from the facts the telling differ not.
O rabble, that, ill-born beyond all people,
are in a place, to speak of which is hard,
far better had ye here been sheep or goats!
When we were down within the gloomy well,
beneath the Giants feet, though lower far,
and I still gazing at its lofty wall,
I heard one say to me: Look where thou walkest!
and see that with thy feet thou trample not
the heads of us two wretched, weary brothers!
[[365]]
Thereat I turned around, and saw before me,
and neath my feet, a lake which, being frozen,
seemed to be made of glass and not of water.
The Danube up in Austria never made
so thick a veil in winter for its course,
nor yonder neath the cold sky did the Don,
as what was here; for even if Tambernich
had fallen on it, or had Pietrapana,
it had not cracked even at its very edge.
And as a frog remains, to do its croaking,
with muzzle out of water, in the season
when oft the peasant dreams that she is gleaning;
even so, as far as where ones shame is shown,
the woeful shades were livid in the ice,
as to the notes of storks they set their teeth.
Each kept his face turned downward; from his mouth,
the cold, and from his eyes, his saddened heart
provides itself a witness in their midst.
When I had gazed around a while, I looked
down at my feet, and two I saw with heads
so close together, that their hair was mixed.
Ye that are pressing thus your breasts together,
say who ye are, said I. They bent their necks,
and when their faces had been raised toward me,
their eyes, moist only inwardly before,
gushed upward though the lids; whereat the cold,
binding the tears between them, closed them up.
[[367]]
A clamp neer bound so tightly board to board;
whereat, so great the anger mastering them,
like two he-goats, they butted one another.
And one who had, by reason of the cold,
lost both his ears, with face still lowered, said:
Why dost thou mirror thee so much on us?
If thou wouldst know who those two near thee are,
the valley from which thy Bisenzio flows
belonged to their sire Albert and to them.
They issued from one body; and thou canst search
through all Cana, but thou lt never find
a shade more worthy to be fixed in ice;
not he, whose breast and shadow broken were
by one same blow at Arthurs hand; nor yet
Focaccia; nor this fellow here, whose head
so blocks me, that I cannot see beyond,
and who was Sssol Mascheroni called;
who he was, thou, if Tuscan, now knowst well.
And that thou put me to no further speech,
know, then, that I was Camicin de Pazzi,
and that, to excuse me, I await Carln.
Thereafter I beheld a thousand faces
made doglike by the cold; hence frozen ponds
cause me to shudder now, and always will.
And now, while toward that center we were moving,
whereto all heavy objects gravitate,
and I was trembling in the eternal cold;
[[369]]
I know not whether it were will, or fate,
or chance; but as I walked among the heads,
hard in the face of one I struck my foot.
Weeping he scolded: Wherefore dost thou smite me?
Unless thou comest to increase the vengeance
for Mont Aperti, why dost thou molest me?
And I said: Teacher, wait now for me here,
that I through him may issue from a doubt;
then at thy pleasure shalt thou hurry me.
My Leader stopped; and I to him, who still
was savagely blaspheming, said: What sort
of man art thou, that scoldest people so?
Now who art thou, that goest he replied,
through Antenora, smiting cheeks so roughly,
that it would be too much, wert thou alive?
I am alive, and it may profit thee
was my reply, for me to place thy name,
if fame thou ask, among my other notes.
And he: I crave the contrary; away
with thee, and bother me no more; for ill
dost thou know how to flatter in this bog!
Thereat I seized him by the nape, and said:
It needs must be that thou reveal thy name,
or that no hair remain upon thee here!
Then he to me: Though thou pull out my hair,
I ll neither say, nor show thee, who I am,
fall thou upon my head a thousand times.
[[371]]
I had his hair wrapped round my hand already,
and more than one shock had I plucked from him,
while he was barking, with his eyes turned down;
when here another cried: What ails thee, Bocca?
Is making noise with jawbones not enough,
unless thou bark? What devil touches thee?
Henceforth said I, I would not have thee speak,
perfidious traitor; for true news of thee
I ll carry with me to thy lasting shame.
Begone, and tell whateer thou wilt; he answered,
but be not silent, if thou issue hence,
of him who had just now his tongue so ready.
He here bewails the money of the French;
Him of Duera thou canst say, I saw
where cold the days are for the sinful folk.
And if thou shouldst be asked who else was there,
thou hast beside thee him of Becchera,
who had his gorget cut in two by Florence.
Gianni de Soldanier is further on,
I think, with Ganellon, and Tebaldello,
who, while its people slept, unlocked Faenza.
From him we had departed now, when two
I saw, so frozen in a single hole,
that one mans head served as the others cap.
And as because of hunger bread is eaten,
even so the upper on the other set
his teeth, where to the nape the brain is joined.
[[373]]
Not otherwise did Tydeus gnaw the temples
of Menalippus out of spite, than this one
was gnawing at the skull and other parts.
O thou that showest by a sign so beastly
hatred toward him thou eatest, tell me why,
said I to him, on this express condition,
that shouldst thou rightfully of him complain,
I, knowing who ye are, and that ones sin,
may quit thee for it in the world above,
if that, wherewith I speak, be not dried up.
[[375]]
INFERNO XXXIII

The Ninth Circle. Treachery. Cocytus

Traitors to their Country, and to their Guests

From his grim meal that sinner raised his mouth,
and wiped it on the hair of that same head,
which he had spoiled behind. He then began:
Thou wouldst that I renew a hopeless grief,
the thought of which already breaks my heart,
before I speak of it. But if my words
are likely to be seeds, and bear the fruit
of infamy upon the traitor whom I gnaw,
speaking and weeping shalt thou see together.
I know not who thou art, nor by what means
thou rt come down here, but when I hear thee speak,
thou truly seemst to me a Florentine.
Know, then, that I Count Ugolino was,
and this man here Ruggieri, the Archbishop;
and now I ll tell thee why I m thus his neighbor.
That, as the outcome of his evil thoughts,
I, trusting him, was seized, and afterward
was put to death, there is no need to say;
but that which thou canst not have heard, that is,
how cruel was my death, thou now shalt hear,
and whether he have wronged me thou shalt know.
[[377]]
A narrow slit within the moulting-tower,
which bears, because of me, the name of Hunger,
and in whose walls still others must be locked,
had through its opening shown me many a moon
already, when I had the evil dream,
which rent apart the curtain of the future.
This one therein a lord and huntsman seemed,
chasing the wolf and wolfings toward the mount
which hinders Pisans from beholding Lucca,
with bitches lean and eager and well trained;
for he had set before him in his van
Gualandi with Sismondi and Lanfranchi.
After a little run both father and sons
seemed weary to me; then methought I saw
their flanks torn open by sharp-pointed fangs.
When, just before the morning, I awoke,
I heard my children, who were with me there,
sob in their sleep, and ask me for their bread.
Cruel indeed thou art, if, thinking what
my heart forebode, thou grievest not already;
and if thou weepest not, at what art wont
to weep? Awake they were, and now the hour
was drawing nigh when food was brought to us,
hence each, by reason of his dream, was worried;
and then I heard the dread towers lower door
nailed up; whereat, without a word, I looked
my children in the face. I did not weep,
[[379]]
so like a stone had I become within;
they wept; and my poor little Anselm said:
Father, thou lookest so! What aileth thee?
But still I did not weep, nor did I answer
through all that day, or through the following night,
till on the world another sun had dawned.
Then, when a little beam had made its way
into our woeful prison, and I perceived
by their four faces, how I looked myself,
I bit in anguish both my hands. And they,
thinking it done because I craved to eat,
immediately stood up, and said to me:
Father, much less shall we be pained, if us
thou eat; thou with this wretched flesh didst clothe us,
do thou, then, strip it from us now. Thereat,
to sadden them no more, I calmed myself;
through that day and the next we all kept mute.
Ah, why, hard earth, didst thou not open up?
Then Gaddo, when the fourth day we had reached,
stretched himself out at length before my feet,
and said: My father, why dost thou not help me?
And there he died; and, evn as thou seest me,
between the fifth day and the sixth I saw
the three fall one by one; and, blind already,
I gave myself to groping over each,
and two days called them, after they were dead;
then fasting proved more powerful than pain.
[[381]]
When he had spoken thus, with eyes awry,
he seized again the wretched skull with teeth,
which for the bone were strong as are a dogs.
Ah, Pisa, foul reproach of those that dwell
in that fair country where the s is heard;
since slow thy neighbors are to punish thee,
then let Caprara and Gorgona move,
and make a hedge across the Arnos mouth,
that every person in thee may be drowned!
for though Count Ugolino had the name
of traitor to thee in thy castle-towns,
thou shouldst not thus have crucified his sons.
Their youthful age had made, thou modern Thebes,
Brigata and Uguccione innocent,
and the other two my canto names above.
Further along we went, to where the ice
roughly enswathes another class of people,
not downward turned, but wholly on their backs.
Weeping itself allows not weeping there,
and tears, which find a barrier in their eyes,
turn back, to cause their suffering to increase;
because the first ones form a solid block,
and thus like crystal visors wholly fill
the hollow cup beneath the brow. And though,
as in a callous spot,
because of cold
all feeling had departed from my face,
[[383]]
it seemed to me that now I felt some wind;
whence I to him: My Teacher, who moves this?
Is not all moving air quenched here below?
And he: Ere long shalt thou be where thine eyes,
seeing the cause which raineth down the blast,
will make an answer to thee as to this.
One of the wretches of the icy crust
called out to us thereat: O souls, so cruel,
that unto you the last place is assigned,
remove for me the hard veils on my face,
that I may somewhat vent the pain that fills
my heart, before the tears freeze up again.
Whence I to him: If thou wouldst have me help thee,
say who thou art; and should I not relieve thee,
may I needs reach the bottom of the ice!
Then he: I Frate Alberigo am,
he of the evil gardens fruit, who here
for every fig I gave get back a date.
Then Oh! said I, art thou already dead?
And he to me replied: I have no knowledge
how in the world above my body fares.
Such is the privilege of this Ptoloma,
that frequently a soul falls into it,
ere Atropos have caused it to move on.
But that thou scrape more gladly from my face
these glassy tears, know, then, that just as soon
as any soul betrays, as I betrayed,
[[385]]
its body is taken from it by a demon,
who then takes charge of it, until its time
be all revolved. Into a well like this
it rushes headlong down; and so, perhaps,
the body of the shade that winters here
behind me, is still visible above.
This thou shouldst know, if just come down, for he
Ser Branca d Oria is, and many years
have now gone by, since he was thus shut up.
I think said I, that thou deceivest me,
for Branca d Oria is not dead as yet,
but eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and dons his clothes.
Above us, in the Malebranches ditch,
he said, there, where the sticky pitch is boiling,
not yet had Michel Zanches soul arrived,
when in his stead this fellow left behind
a devil in his body, as did also
one of his kinsmen, who with him performed
the treachery. But stretch thy hand here now,
and ope mine eyes! And yet I oped them not,
for rudeness shown to him was courtesy.
Ah, Genoese! ye men estranged from all
morality, and full of every vice,
why from the earth are ye not wholly driven?
for with the meanest spirit of Romagna,
I found one such of you, that, for his deeds,
in soul he bathes already in Cocytus,
and seems in body still alive above.
[[387]]
INFERNO XXXIV

The Ninth Circle. Treachery. Cocytus

Traitors to their Benefactors. Lucifer

The banners of the King of Hell advance
toward us; now, therefore, look ahead of thee,
my Teacher said, and see if thou perceive him.
As, when a heavy fog is breathed abroad,
or when at night our hemisphere grows dark,
a windmill looks when seen from far away;
even such a structure seemed I now to see;
then, for the wind, I shrank behind my Leader,
for other shelter was there none. I now 
and t is with fear I put it into verse, 
was where the shades were wholly covered up,
and visible as is a straw in glass;
some lying are; and some are standing up,
one on his head, the other on his soles;
one, like a bow, bends toward his feet his face.
When we had gone so far ahead, that now
it pleased my Teacher to reveal to me
the Creature who once seemed so beautiful,
he stepped from where he was in front of me,
stopped me, and said: Lo Dis, and lo the place,
where thou must arm thyself with fortitude!
[[389]]
How frozen and how weak I then became,
ask thou not, Reader, for I write it not,
because all speech would be of small avail.
I did not die, nor yet remained alive;
think for thyself now, hast thou any wit,
what I became, of both of these deprived.
The Emperor of the Realm of Woe stood forth
out of the ice from midway up his breast;
and I compare more closely with a Giant,
than merely with his arms the Giants do;
consider now how great that whole must be,
that with such parts as these may be compared.
If, once as beautiful as ugly now,
he still raised up his brows against his Maker,
justly doth every woe proceed from him.
Oh, what a marvel it appeared to me,
when I beheld three faces to his head!
One was in front of us, and that was red;
the other two were to the latter joined
right oer the middle of each shoulder-blade,
and met each other where he had his crest;
that on the right twixt white and yellow seemed;
the left one such to look at, as are those
who come from there, where valeward flows the Nile.
Under each face two mighty wings stretched out,
of size proportioned to so huge a bird;
sails of the sea I never saw so large.
[[391]]
They had no feathers, but were like a bats
in fashion; these he flapped in such a way,
that three winds issued forth from him; thereby
Cocytus was completely frozen up.
With six eyes he was weeping, and his tears
and bloody slaver trickled oer three chins.
In each mouth, as a heckle would have done,
a sinner he was crushing with his teeth,
and thus was causing pain to three of them.
To him who was in front of us the biting
was nothing to the clawing, for at times
his back remained completely stripped of skin.
That soul up there which hath the greatest pain
Judas Iscariot is, my Teacher said,
who hath his head within, and plies his legs
without. Of the other two, whose heads are down,
Brutus is he who from the black snout hangs;
see how he writhes, and utters not a word!
Cassius the other is, who so big-limbed
appears. But night is coming up again,
and now t is time to leave, for we ve seen all.
Then, as it pleased him, I embraced his neck,
and he availed himself of time and place,
and when the wings were opened wide enough,
he firmly grasped the shaggy flanks, and then
from tuft to tuft he afterward descended
between the matted hair and frozen crusts.
[[393]]
When we were come to where the thigh turns round,
just at the thick part of the hips, my Leader
with tiring effort and with stress of breath
turned his head round to where his legs had been,
and seized the hair as one would who ascends;
hence I thought we were going back to Hell.
Hold fast to me, for by such stairs as these
panting like one worn out, my Teacher said,
must such great wickedness be left behind.
Then, through an opening in the rock he issued,
and, after seating me upon its edge,
over toward me advanced his cautious step.
Raising mine eyes, I thought that I should still
see Lucifer the same as when I left him;
but I beheld him with his legs held up.
And thereupon, if I became perplexed,
let those dull people think, who do not see
what kind of point that was which I had passed.
Stand up my Teacher said, upon thy feet!
the way is long and difficult the road,
and now to middle-tierce the sun returns.
It was no palace hallway where we were,
but just a natural passage under ground,
which had a wretched floor and lack of light.
Before I tear myself from this abyss,
Teacher, said I on rising, talk to me
a little, and correct my wrong ideas.
[[395]]
Where is the ice? And how is this one fixed
thus upside down? And in so short a time
how hath the sun from evening crossed to morn?
Then he to me: Thou thinkest thou art still
beyond the center where I seized the hair
of that bad Worm who perforates the world.
While I was going down, thou wast beyond it;
but when I turned, thou then didst pass the point
to which all weights are drawn on every side;
thou now art come beneath the hemisphere
opposed to that the great dry land oercovers,
and neath whose zenith was destroyed the Man,
who without sinfulness was born and died;
thy feet thou hast upon the little sphere,
which forms the other surface of Judecca.
T is morning here, whenever evening there;
and he who made our ladder with his hair,
is still fixed fast, evn as he was before.
He fell on this side out of Heaven; whereat,
the land, which hitherto was spread out here,
through fear of him made of the sea a veil,
and came into our hemisphere; perhaps
to flee from him, what is on this side seen
left the place empty here, and upward rushed.
There is a place down there, as far removed
from Beelzebub, as eer his tomb extends,
not known by sight, but by a brooklets sound,
[[397]]
which flows down through a hole there in the rock,
gnawed in it by the waters spiral course,
which slightly slopes. My Leader then, and I,
in order to regain the world of light,
entered upon that dark and hidden path;
and, without caring for repose, went up,
he going on ahead, and I behind,
till through a rounded opening I beheld
some of the lovely things the sky contains;
thence we came out, and saw again the stars.